# Dead Autonomy, A Thousand Cuts or Partial Independence? The Autonomous Status of Hong Kong

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | David A. Rezvani |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2011 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | طراحی و تدوین قانون اساسی |
| **مطالعه موردی** | کره جنوبی |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 4.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 21 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1080/00472336.2012.634645](https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336.2012.634645) |

## چکیده

Abstract Given China's record of suppressing freedoms and brutalising nationalistically-distinct territories in its midst, the alarm of Hong Kong's 1997 status change from British to Chinese association was especially shrill. After more than a decade of Chinese association, some scholars remain pessimistic. Some have suggested that as if "by a thousand cuts" Hong Kong's autonomous powers will slowly succumb to full Chinese political assimilation. Others have suggested that Hong Kong's autonomy is already dead and remains vulnerable to the unilateral fiat of Chinese authorities. By contrast to these views, this paper will argue that Hong Kong is a polity whose constitutional order is defended by political entrenchment. It is a partially independent political entity which exercises constitutional powers that are robustly defended by the political-economic influence (rather than constitutional influence) which it exerts upon China's central government. As this paper will show, the fortunes of China's leaders are linked to the performance of Hong Kong's economy. And since the territory's economy rests upon the pillars of its autonomous institutions, press freedom, rule of law and civil liberties, this prevents maximalist interference from Beijing. Key Words: Partially independent territoryfederacyautonomyHong KongChinapolitical entrenchment Notes For instance, Ma (2005: 465-82) makes the argument that the power of Hong Kong's civil society was the primary factor for defending the territory's autonomous status in 2003. For the nascent literature on partially independent territories (federacies), see Rezvani (2007: 115-40), O'Leary (2005), Jakobson (2005: 2-4, 13-14), Stepan (1999: 20), Watts (1996: 8-13), Elazar (1993: 190-5; 1994) and Stevens (1977: 117-203). For the limited and exceptional cases of democratisation at the village level, see O'Brien and Li (2000: 465-89). On the identity of Hong Kong's population as distinct from China, see Ku and Pun (2006: 1-16) and So (2011: 6). For example, in 1994 Jardine Matheson Holdings delisted itself from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and moved to Singapore. Similarly, in 1992 HSBC moved its headquarters from Hong Kong to London. In the 1963 case of Van Gend & Loos the European Court of Justice first declared its doctrine of supremacy declaring that, "The Community constitutes a new legal order … For the benefit of which states have limited their sovereign rights, albeit within limited fields, and the subjects of which comprise not only Member States but also their nations. Independently of the legislation of the Member States, Community law therefore not only imposes obligations on individuals but it also intended to confer upon them rights which become part of their legal heritage …" See Burley and Mattli (1993: 41-76). The term "convention" used in the literature on the topic refers to unwritten constitutional rules rather than a meeting of officials to draft or change a written Constitution as with the "Constitutional Convention of 1787." In this paper the term "convention" and "unwritten constitutional rule" are interchangeable. On convention in Britain, see especially Marshall (1984). On convention (unwritten constitutional rules) in the USA, see, for example, Grey (1975: 703-18) and Fallon (2000: 119). On the emphasis of examining internal political institutions rather than confining one's understanding to unitary assumptions, see Allison (1969: 689-71). As sociologist Max Weber argued, ideas are like "railway switchmen." They can affect our perceptions and "obscure the other tracks from view" Gerth and Mills (1958: 63-64). For example, when Zhao's predecessor Hu Yaobang was threatened by Maoist hardliners for focusing on economic reform by visiting capitalist countries and opposing pro-communist ideology, Deng backed him. When Party elders, including Hu Qiaomu, Deng Liqun and Chen Yun, supported a nationwide programme for promoting communist ideology Hu Yaobang disagreed and again Deng supported him. When party hardliners called for a countrywide Anti-Liberalisation Campaign, in 1983 Deng agreed to have Zhao implement it. But with Deng's backing, Zhao implemented the campaign in such a way that "those who had hoped for a full-blown campaign, such as Deng Liqun, Hu Qiaomu, and Wang Renzhi … felt that [Zhao's instructions] had bound them hand and foot and protected bourgeois liberals." As a result, according to Zhao, "There was no nationwide shock, no disruptions to the economy, and no great harm to reform. The overall result was quite good." See Zhao (2009: 185). Leaders like Liu Shaoqi were tortured and died in confinement. Luo Ruiqing attempted suicide after harsh interrogations from the Red Guards. Other key leaders that died under Mao's rule included Peng Dehuai and Tao Zhu. While much of this investment is "round-tripped" from Chinese investors through Hong Kong as well as contributed from international investors that are channelling their capital through the territory, the role of Hong Kong as a conduit for these funds is still critically important for China (see especially Breslin, 2003). Similar to countries like Japan, over the past two decades Hong Kong has shifted much of its manufacturing to mainland China to take advantage of lower operating costs. As a consequence, Hong Kong serves as a major source of banking, transportation and logistical services for re-exports to and from China. Author's interviews with officials of China's State Council, National People's Congress, People's Political Consultative Conference, and leaders of Hong Kong political parties, Hong Kong, October 1999. Author's interview with Chinese foreign ministry official, Cambridge, USA, 2006. This is true for almost all of the WGI measurement categories except for voice and accountability in which Hong Kong's ranking rating is lower and is similar to countries such as South Korea and South Africa. During the lead up to the crisis, in March 2003, after relatively long careers in China's Central Government, NPCSC chairman Li Peng and China's State Council Vice Premier Qian Qichen were retired from their posts (it should, however, be noted that their retirements may be coincidental since there is no known evidence that links their retirement with events in Hong Kong.) As Ho and colleagues (2010) emphasise, these leaders not only serve business interests because they are elected by the 5.76% of the electorate from professional groups, they also have "dense linkages" of inter-personal and inter-organisational connections with businesses by sitting on multiple corporate boards.

## منابع مرتبط

- **تأیید می‌کند** [Presidential politics and the judicial facilitation of dialogue between political actors in new Asian democracies: Comparing the South Korean and Taiwanese experiences](0123-presidential-politics-and-the-judicial-facilitation-of-dialogue-between-politica.fa.md)

</div>