# UN Constitutional Assistance Projects in Comprehensive Peace Missions: An Inventory 1989–2011

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | Vijayashri Sripati |
| **Year** | 2012 |
| **Category** | Constitutional design and drafting processes |
| **Case Study** | Tunisia |
| **Relevance Score** | Pending |
| **Citation Count** | 11 |
| **Source** | openalex |
| **DOI** | [10.1080/13533312.2012.642169](https://doi.org/10.1080/13533312.2012.642169) |

## Abstract

Click to increase image sizeClick to decrease image size ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I thank Professors David Cameron and Michael Pugh, Megan Keogh and the following UN officials/consultants – Brian Atwood, Peter Barwick, Jamal Benomar, Michelle Brandt, Mario Buil-Merce, Lovemore Chikopa, Jill Cottrell, Surya Dhungel, Filippo Di-Capegra, Dennis Dijkeul, Guido Galli, Yash Ghai, Nicholas Haysom, Robert Husbands, Sakuntala Kagardimar, Katy Le Roy, Gianni Magazenni, William Maley, Fred Mwanthagere, Muna Ndulo, Cristiano Papile, Thusitha Pilapitiya Robert Pulver, Bertrand Ramcharan, Anthony Regan, Alvaro Rodriguez, Charmaine Rodriguez, Roland Rich, Peter Russell, Amos Sawyer, Susanne Schmeidl, Francois Simmards, Ramaswamy Sudarshan, Neçla Tsirgi and John M. Tuhaika – for materials, conversations and comments. Notes UN Security Council Res. UN doc., S/Res/1996, 8 July 2011. UN Security Council Res. UN doc., S/Res/1509, 19 Sept. 2003; UN Security Council res. UN doc., S/Res/1885, 15 Sept. 2009. UNDP Bhutan, Annual Report 2005, 2005, p.5. UNDP, ‘The Constitution and Its Relationship to the Legislature’, undated (at: http://mirror.undp.org/magnet/Docs/parliaments/Constitutions.htm), on file with the author. Ibid. Ibid. Ibid. Malawi Law Commission, ‘Report of the Law Commission on the Review of the Constitution’, report no.18, Aug. 2007, pp.8,13. UNDP Maldives, ‘Democratic Governance’, 2011 (at: http://undp.org.mv/v2/?lid=71). UNDP Pacific Centre, ‘Democratic Governance’, 2011 (at: www.undppc.org.fj/pages.cfm/our-work/democratic-governance/strenthening-parliaments-democratic-institution/constitutional-reform). Ibid. Ibid. UNDP Zambia, ‘Constitutional Reform: Support to the Constitution Review Process in Zambia’, 15 Jan. 2009 (at: www.undp.org.zm/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=23:constitutional-reform-support-to-the-constitution-review-process-in-zambia&catid=5:democratic-economic-governance&Itemid=7). UNDP Zimbabwe, ‘Support to Participatory Constitution Making in Zimbabwe (SPCMZ) 2009–2011’ (at: www.undp.org.zw/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=92&Itemid=9). ‘UN Political Chief Pledges Organization's Continued Support for Transition in Egypt’, 28 Feb. 2011 (at: www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=37639&Cr=egypt&Cr1=); ‘Ban Pledges Full UN Help for Tunisia's Transition to Democracy‘, 22 Mar. 2011 (at: www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=37860&Cr=tunisia&Cr1). It is anticipated that by the time this article goes to press, Libya will have become the thirteenth state to receive Security Council-mandated UNCA through the UN Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), a peace mission. ee UN Security Council Res. UN doc., S/Res/2009, 16 September 2011, para. 12 (b). UN Security Council, ‘Special Research Report’, no.2, 5 Oct. 2007, p.3. UN, ‘Guidance Note on UN Assistance to Constitution-Making’, 8 June 2009. UN Charter, Ch.XIII, Arts.87–8; Katy le Roy, ‘Nauru Constitutional Review: Discussion Paper’, June 2006, p.3. ‘Report of the Secretary-General on the Work of the Organization’, UN doc., A/60/1, 2005, p.3. UN Charter, ‘Peaceful Settlement of Disputes’, Ch.VI, Art.33. UN Security Council, ‘Conflict Prevention Historical Chronology’ (at: www.securitycouncilreport.org/site/c.glKWLeMTIsG/b.3462777/). Boutros Boutros-Ghali, An Agenda for Peace, New York: UN, 1992. Ibid. UN Secretary-General, ‘The Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa’, 16 Apr. 1998, para.105 (at: www.un.org/ecosocdev/geninfo/afrec/sgreport/index.html); UN, ‘Guidance Note of the Secretary-General – UN Approach to Rule of Law Assistance’, undated. UN Secretary-General (see n.24 above); UN Secretary-General, ‘Report of the Secretary-General: Prevention of Armed Conflict’, UN doc. A/55/985–S/2001/574, 7 June 2001, para.78. UN Security Council (see n.1 above), para.18; Bertram I. Spector, Negotiating Peace and Confronting Corruption, Washington, DC: US Institute of Peace, 2011. ‘Comparative Table Regarding the UN Security Council Committees Established Pursuant to Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)’ (at: www.un.org/es/sc/ctc/pdf/comparative-table-2011-05.pdf). ‘Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’, Ch.1, Art.7, 2004; ‘Permanent Constitution of Iraq’, 2005, §1, Art.7. For an anti-terrorism provision in another UN-assisted constitution, see ‘The Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan’ (2008), Art.8(5). UN Millennium Declaration, GA Res.55/2, UN GAOR, UN doc. A/Res/55/2, 18 Sept. 2000, para.6; UN, ‘In Larger Freedom: Towards Development, Security and Human Rights for All’, report of the UN Secretary-General, UN doc., A/Res/59/2005, 21 Mar. 2005. UN doc., S/Res/1325, Oct. 2000. UN (see n.17 above), pp.4–6. Ibid. See ‘Principles Relating to the Status of National Institutions’ (Paris Principles), Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Office (at: www2.ohchr.org/english/law/parisprinciples.htm). Vijayashri Sripati, ‘UN Constitutional Assistance: A TWAIL Perspective’, PhD thesis, Osgoode Hall Law School, Toronto, 2010, chs.4–5. Ibid.; Spector (see n.26 above), pp.67–71; UNDP, Democracy and Development in the Least Developed Countries, New York: UN, 2006, pp.64–9. Ibid.; Sripati (see n.33 above), ch.5. Edward Newman and Roland Rich (eds), The UN Role in Promoting Democracy – Between Ideals and Reality, Tokyo: UN University Press, 2003, p.3. Secretary-General's remarks to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly on the Proposed Programme Budget for the Biennium 2008–09, New York, 25 Oct. 2007 (at: www.un.org/apps/sg/sgstats.asp?nid=2815). For the nature of the conflict see ‘Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi’, 28 Aug. 2000, Art.4. Ibid. Security Council Res.1545, 24 May 2004, para.5. Security Council Res. 435, UN doc. S/Res/435, 29 Sept 1978. Ibid. Paul Szasz, ‘Creating the Namibian Constitution’, in Heribert Weiland and Matthew Braham (eds), The Namibian Peace Process: Implications and Lessons for the Future, Druck: Arnold Bergstraesser Institut, 1994, pp.243–56; Paul Lewis, ‘Paul Szasz, 72, Legal Expert; Helped Draft 2 Constitutions’, New York Times, 7 May 2002, p.A12. UNDP Rwanda, ‘Ten Years on: Helping Rebuild a Nation – the UN in Rwanda’, Kigali, Apr. 2004, p.15. Ibid.; Government of Rwanda, UNDP Rwanda and DIFD, ‘Rwanda: Programme for strengthening good governance’, 2007(at: www.undp.org.rw/Democratic-project46259.html?id=112 ). Security Council Res. 1590, UN doc. S/Res/1590, 24 March 2005, para. 4. ‘Agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and the Portuguese Republic on the Question of East Timor’, 5 May 1999. Ralph Wilde, International Territorial Administration: How Trusteeship and the Civilizing Mission Never Went Away, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008, p.17; Sergio Viera de Mello (at: www.ohchr.org/EN/ABOUTUS/Pages/Vieira.aspx). Hon. Richard G. Lugar (Sen. Indiana), ‘Kosovo: A Way Forward?’, Hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations US Senate, 109th Congress, First Session, 8 Nov. 2005, p. 1. Rambouillet Agreement – Interim Agreement for Peace and Self-Government in Kosovo, US State Department, Feb. 1999 (at: www.state.gov/www/regions/eur/ksvo_rambouillet_text.html). Republic of Kosovo Assembly (at: www.assembly-kosova.org/?cid=2,128,1635). ‘United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)’, Fact Sheet, 10 Aug. 2007, pp.1–5.
