# Nanoparticles in Ancient Materials: The Metallic Lustre Decorations of Medieval Ceramics

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | Philippe Sciau |
| **Year** | 2012 |
| **Category** | Cultural heritage preservation during institutional change |
| **Case Study** | Tunisia |
| **Relevance Score** | 1.0 |
| **Citation Count** | 59 |
| **Source** | openalex |
| **DOI** | [10.5772/34080](https://doi.org/10.5772/34080) |
| **Full Text** | [Open Access](https://www.intechopen.com/citation-pdf-url/36899) |

## Abstract

Investigations using various techniques showed that red glasses of the late Bronze Age (1200-1000 BCE) from Frattesina di Rovigo (Italy) were coloured thanks to the excitation of phasmon surface modes of copper nanoparticles (Angelini et al. 2004; Artioli et al. 2008). The protohistoric community of this region developed advanced glass-manufacturing technology and was able to induce the exsolution of metallic copper crystals in the top layer of glass by exposing the material to reducing conditions. The presence of copper nanoparticles and cuprous oxide (cuprite Cu2O) had already been reported in Celtic red enamels dated from 400 to 100 BCE (Brun et al. 1991). The use of metallic particles for colouring glass spread during the Roman period. Most of the red tesserae used in Roman mosaics were made of glass containing a dispersion of copper nanocrystals (Brun, Mazerolles et al. 1991; Colomban et al. 2003; Ricciardi et al. 2009). In addition to the copper crystals, gold nanoparticles were identified in some red tesserae showing that other metallic nanocrystals were used during Roman times (Colomban, March et al. 2003). It is precisely the case of the well-known Roman Lycurgus Cup in glass dated from the 4th century CE and currently exhibited in the British Museum (Freestone et al. 2007). The glass of this cup is dichroic and resembles jade with an opaque greenish-yellow tone, but when light shines through the glass (transmitted light) it turns into a translucent ruby colour. It has been demonstrated that the spectacular colour change is caused by colloidal metal and more precisely by nanocrystals of a silver-gold alloy dispersed throughout the glassy matrix (Barber & Freestone 1990). A handful of other Roman glasses showing a dichroic effect were also reported and although the colour change is not so spectacular, the Lycurgus Cup is obviously the result of a good technical mastery of Roman glass-workers (Freestone, Meeks et al. 2007). The Roman craftsmen knew that glass could be red coloured and that unusual colour change effect generated by the addition of noble metal bearing material when the glass was molten could be engineered. Nevertheless, the difficulties in controlling the
