# First report of grapevine Flavescence dorée phytoplasma in the Czech Republic.

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Š. Linhartová, K. Tománková, H. Orságová, Miroslava Hejlová, V. Čermák, Jakub Beránek, N. Mehle, Zala Kogej, A. Eichmeier |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2023 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Transitional justice |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Czech Republic |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 1.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 1 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1094/PDIS-02-23-0315-PDN](https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-02-23-0315-PDN) |

## چکیده

Viticulture is a traditional branch of agriculture in the Czech Republic. Grapevines (Vitis vinifera L.) are cultivated on more than 18,000 hectares in the wine-growing regions of Bohemia and South Moravia. South Moravia alone accounts for more than 90 % of the total wine-growing area in the country. Grapevine yellows are a complex of diseases associated with the phytoplasma presence. Phytoplasmas of at least five different groups can cause similar symptoms in grapevines, and they can be distinguished only on a molecular basis (EPPO 2016). One of them, the grapevine Flavescence dorée phytoplasma (GFDP), which belongs to the 16SrV group, is listed in Annex II, Part B, of the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 of 28 November 2019 as a Union quarantine pest known to occur in the Union territory. Official surveys for GFDP in the Czech Republic have been carried out since 2007. In 2016, the first occurrence of Scaphoideus titanus Ball, 1932, the main vector of GFDP, was reported in the South Moravian Region (EPPO Reporting Service 2016). This is a matter of concern because it indicates that there is a risk of disease dissemination to other geographical locations. In September 2021, a total of 250 samples of V. vinifera (preferentially focused on symptomatic plants) and four samples of the wild plant host Clematis vitalba L. were collected from 50 vineyards in South Moravia. Total DNA was extracted using High Pure PCR Template Preparation Kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). For phytoplasma screening, a real-time PCR test for generic detection of phytoplasmas was used (Christensen et al. 2004). Samples evaluated as positive were further tested by PCR using phytoplasma universal P1 and P7 primers (Deng and Hiruki 1991; Schneider et al. 1995), followed by nested PCR using the 16SrV group-specific primers fB1 and rULWS1 (Smart et al. 1996). For identification of 16SrV phytoplasma, sequence analysis of the secY-map genetic locus was performed. Two sets of primers were used: FD9f5/MAPr1 primers for the first PCR and FD9f6/MAPr2 for the nested PCR (Arnaud et al. 2007) with PCRBIO TaqMix (PCR Biosystems, London, UK). The nested PCR products were purified and sequenced (Eurofins Genomics, Ebersberg, Germany). The sequences were compared with sequences from the GenBank database. Phytoplasma of the 16SrV group was detected in three samples: V. vinifera cv. Gewürztraminer with symptoms of leaf reddening with no rolling and no other typical symptoms; C. vitalba L. with leaf curling (Fig. 1A); symptomless C. vitalba. The obtained sequences of the secY-map locus of all three 16SrV-positive samples were identical to the sequence of GFDP, isolate Vv-SI257 (Acc. No. FN811141), detected in grapevine in Tuscany (Italy), which belongs to 16SrV group. The sequence of the V. vinifera cv. Gewürztraminer isolate was submitted to GenBank under Acc. No. OQ185203. This isolate belongs to the Map-FD3 cluster (Fig. 1B), and the genotype identified is M51 (corresponding to FD-C), which has already been found in C. vitalba and outbreaks of Flavescence dorée in grapevines in some other European countries (Malembic-Maher et al. 2020). Based on the abovementioned results, this is the first report of the GFDP in the Czech Republic.

</div>