# Performance Legitimacy, State Autonomy and China's Economic Miracle

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | Hongxing Yang, Dingxin Zhao |
| **Year** | 2014 |
| **Category** | Privatization and state-owned enterprise restructuring |
| **Case Study** | South Korea |
| **Relevance Score** | Pending |
| **Citation Count** | 178 |
| **Source** | openalex |
| **DOI** | [10.1080/10670564.2014.918403](https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2014.918403) |

## Abstract

AbstractTheories that explain post-Mao China's economic success tend to attribute it to one or several 'successful' policies or institutions of the Chinese government, or to account for the success from economic perspectives. This article argues that the success of the Chinese economy relies not just on the Chinese state's economic policy but also on its social policies. Moreover, China's economic success does not merely lie in the effectiveness of any single economic or social policy or institution, but also in the state's capacity to make a policy shift when it faces the negative unintended consequences of its earlier policies. The Chinese state is compelled to make policy shifts quickly because performance constitutes the primary base of its legitimacy, and the Chinese state is able to make policy shifts because it enjoys a high level of autonomy inherited from China's past. China's economic development follows no fixed policies and relies on no stable institutions, and there is no 'China model' or 'Beijing consensus' that can be constructed to explain its success. Notes 1. National Bureau of Statistics of China, Statistics Bulletin, see also: http://www.stats.gov.cn. 2. Robert Fogel, 'Why China's economy will grow to $123 trillion by 2040?', Foreign Policy, (4 January 2010); Justin Yifu Lin, 'Zhongguo Jingji Baochi 20 Nian Gaosu Zengzhang Mei Wenti' ['China has no problem to keep high-speed economic growth in the coming 20 years'], Special Article in Phoenix Website, (18 July 2011). 3. Joshua Cooper Ramo, The Beijing Consensus: Notes on the New Physics of Chinese Power (London: The Foreign Policy Centre, 2004); Minglu Chen and David S. G. Goodman, 'The China model: one country, six authors', Journal of Contemporary China 21(73), (2012), pp. 169–185; Suisheng Zhao, 'The China model: can it replace the Western model of modernization?', Journal of Contemporary China 19(65), (2010), pp. 419–436; Barry Naughton, 'China's distinctive system: can it be a model for others?', Journal of Contemporary China 19(65), (2010), pp. 437–460; Scott Kennedy, 'The myth of the Beijing consensus', Journal of Contemporary China 19(65), (2010), pp. 461–477; Shaoguang Wang, 'Xuexi Jizhi, Shiying Nengli yu Zhongguo Moshi' ['Learning mechanism, adaptation capability and "China model"'], Kaifang Shidai [Open Times] 7, (2009), pp. 36–40; Yongnian Zheng, Zhongguo Moshi: Jingyan yu Kunju [The China Model: Experience and Dilemma] (Hongzhou: Zhejiang People's Press, 2010); Xueliang Ding, Bianlun 'Zhongguo Moshi' [Debates on 'The China Model'] (Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press, 2011); Yasheng Huang, 'Zhongguo Moshi' Daodi You Duo Dute [How Unique is the 'China Model' in the End?] (Beijing: Zhongxin Press, 2011). 4. Jinglian Wu, Understanding and Interpreting Chinese Economic Reform (Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western, 2005). 5. Yushi Mao, 'Zhongguo Gaige de Zhiduguan' ['The institutional perspective of China's reform'], Gaige yu Zhanlve [Reform & Strategy] 6, (1994), pp. 13–17; Hong Sheng, 'Guanyu Zhongguo Shichanghua Gaige de Guodu Guocheng de Yanjiu' ['Research on the transitional process of China's market-oriented reform'], Jingji Yanjiu [Economic Research Journal] 1, (1996), pp. 69–81; Weiying Zhang, 'Cong Xiandai Qiye Lilun Kan Zhongguo Guoyou Qiye de Gaige' ['China's state-owned enterprises' reform from the perspective of theories of the firm'], Gaige yu Zhanlve [Reform & Strategy] 6, (1994), pp. 18–20. 6. Douglass North, Structure and Change in Economic History (New York: Norton, 1981). 7. Chalmers A. Johnson, MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial Policy, 1925–1975 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1982); Alice H. Amsden, Asia's Next Giant South Korea and Late Industrialization (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1989); Robert Wade, Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990); Peter Evans, Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995). 8. Yang Yao, 'Zhongxing Zhengfu yu Zhongguo de Jingji Qiji' ['The neutral state and China's economic miracle'], Twenty-First Century Review 107, (June 2008), pp. 15–25. 9. Jean C. Oi, Rural China Takes Off: Institutional Foundations of Economic Reform (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999); Andrew Walder, 'Local governments as industrial firms: an organizational analysis of China's transitional economy', American Journal of Sociology 101(2), (1995), pp. 263–301.10. Li-An Zhou, 'Zhongguo Difang Guanyuan de Jinsheng Jinbiaosai Moshi Yanjiu' ['Governing China's local officials: an analysis of promotion tournament model'], Economic Research Journal 7, (2007), pp. 36–50.11. Yingyi Qian, Gabriella Montinola and Barry Weingast, 'Federalism, Chinese style: the political basis for economic success in China', World Politics 48, (1995), pp. 50–81; Susan L. Shirk, The Political Logic of Economic Reform in China (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1993).12. Steven N. S. Cheung, Zhongguo de Jingji Zhidu [The Economic System of China] (Beijing: Zhongxin Press, 2009).13. For instance, in the 1980s and 1990s, labor intensive foreign companies in Guangdong, Fujian and Zhejiang absorbed a huge amount of surplus labor and contributed to China's economic development, but now these industries are the source of pollution, unemployment, China's trade war with the US and frequent workers' protests. Also, when the Chinese government pushed forward the housing reform in 1998, its original intention was to improve urban Chinese's living conditions. Yet, in a few years, while housing conditions have indeed hugely improved, Chinese can no longer buy an apartment at affordable prices.14. Yao, 'Zhongxing Zhengfu yu Zhongguo de Jingji Qiji'.15. Performance has always been a major source of state legitimacy in China ever since the Western Zhou Dynasty (ca. 1066–771 BCE). See Dingxin Zhao, 'The mandate of heaven and performance legitimation in historical and contemporary China', American Behavioral Scientist 53(3), (2009), pp. 416–433.16. Michael Mann, States, War and Capitalism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988).17. Dingxin Zhao and John A. Hall, 'State power and patterns of late development', Sociology 28(1), (1994), pp. 211–229.18. Juan J. Linz, 'Legitimacy of democracy and socioeconomic systems', in Mattei Dogan Boulder, ed., Comparing Pluralist Democracies: Strains on Legitimacy (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1988), p. 65.19. John H. Schaar, Legitimacy in the Modern State (New Brunswick: Transaction Books, 1981); William Connolly, ed., Legitimacy and the State (New York: New York University Press, 1984); Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991).20. Max Weber, 'The nature of social action', in W. G. Runciman and E. Mathews, eds, Max Weber: Selections in Translation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978), p. 28.21. Randall Collins, 'Prediction in macro-sociology: the case of the Soviet collapse', American Journal of Sociology 100, (1995), pp. 1552–1593.22. For more detailed discussion, see Zhao, 'The mandate of heaven and performance legitimation in historical and contemporary China'.23. Seymour Martin Lipset, Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics (New York: Anchor Books, 1963), pp. 64–69.24. For the most recent debates on state legitimacy in contemporary China, see Florian Schneider and Yih-Jye Hwang, 'The Sichuan earthquake and the heavenly mandate: legitimizing Chinese rule through disaster discourse', Journal of Contemporary China 23(88), (2014), DOI: 10.1080/10670564.2013.861145; Jinghan Zeng, 'The debate on regime legitimacy in China: bridging the wide gulf between Western and Chinese scholarship', Journal of Contemporary China 23(88), (2014), DOI: 10.1080/10670564.2013.861141.25. Charles Tilly, 'Reflections on the history of European state-making', in Charles Tilly, ed., The Formation of National States in Western Europe (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975), pp. 3–83; Rudolf Braun, 'Taxation, sociopolitical structure, and state-building: Great Britain and Brandenburg-Prussia', in Tilly, ed., The Formation of National States in Western Europe, pp. 243–327.26. In comparison, Russians constituted only 44% of the population in the former Soviet Union.27. Yang Gan, 'Zhongguo Daolu: Sanshinian yu Liushinian' ['The road of China, thirty years and sixty years'], Dushu [Reading] 6, (2007), pp. 3–13.28. Maurice Meisner, Mao's China and After: A History of the People's Republic (New York: Free Press, 1986).29. Dingxin Zhao, The Power of Tiananmen: State–Society Relations and the 1989 Movement (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001).30. Jianying Zha, Bashi Niandai Fangtanlu [Interview Records of 1980s] (Beijing: Sanlian Publishing House, 2006).31. Han Zong, Guoqi Gaige Sanshinian Qingliji [Personal Experience of Thirty Years of State-Owned Enterprises Reform] (Shanghai: Shanghai People's Press, 2008).32. Kate Xiao Zhou, How the Farmers Changed China: Power of the People (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).33. Ronald Coase and Wang Ning, How China Became Capitalist (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012).34. The anti-spiritual pollution campaign in late 1983 and the anti-bourgeoisie liberalization campaign in early 1987 are two prominent examples.35. For more discussion on problems associated with the rural to urban migration, see Deng Quheng and Bjorn Gustafsson, 'The hukou converters—China's lesser known rural to urban migrants', Journal of Contemporary China, 23(88), (2014), pp. 657–679.36. Zhao, The Power of Tiananmen, pp. 126–128.37. Yao Yang, 'Zhongxing Zhengfu: Dui Zhuanxingqi Zhongguo Jingji Chenggong de Yige Jieshi' ['The neutral state: an explanation of China's economic success in the transformation period'], Economic Research Journal 3, (2009), pp. 3–13.38. Zhao, The Power of Tiananmen.39.Ibid., ch. 7.40.Ibid., p. 131.41. Mouren Wu, Minghui Bao, Peihua Ni, Peimin Ni and Qingjia Wang, eds, Bajiu zhongguo minyun jishi [Daily Accounts on the 1989 Democracy Movement in China], (no publisher, 1989).42. Coase and Wang, How China Became Capitalist.43. Yang Yao, 'Privatizing the small SOEs', in Ross Garnaut and Ligang Song, eds, China's Third Economic Transformation: The Rise of the Private Economy (London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2004), ch. 7.44. Wei Pan, Nongmin yu Shichang: Zhongguo Jiceng Zhengquan yu Xiangzheng Qiye [Farmers and Market—China's Grassroots Political Authority and the Township and Village Enterprises] (Beijing: Commercial Press, 2003).45. Andrew C. Mertha, 'Society in the state: China's nondemocratic political pluralization', in Stanley Rosen and Peter Hays Gries, eds, State and Society in 21st Century China (London: Routledge, 2009), pp. 2–3.46. Samuel P. Huntington, Political Order in Changing Societies (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1968).47. Dingxin Zhao, 'Mincui Zhengzhi—Zhongguo Chongtu Zhengzhi de Zouxiang' ['Populism politics—the trend of China's contentious politics'], Lingdaozhe [Leader] 20, (February 2008), pp. 42–49.48. Samuel E. Finer, The History of Government from the Earliest Times (vols 1–3) (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), pp. 1473–1475.
