# THE BIOPOLITICS OF REPRODUCTION

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Catherine Waldby, Melinda Cooper |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2008 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Privatization and state-owned enterprise restructuring |
| **مطالعه موردی** | South Korea |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | در انتظار |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 199 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1080/08164640701816223](https://doi.org/10.1080/08164640701816223) |

## چکیده

Click to increase image sizeClick to decrease image size Notes 1. This research is funded by an Economic and Social Research Council Stem Cell Initiative grant 'The Global Biopolitics of Human Embryonic Stem Cells', RES-340-25-0001. The authors would like to thank Vicki Kirby, Olivia Harvey and the anonymous readers for their feedback and assistance with this article. The OECD birth rate dropped from 2.4 in 1970 to 1.6 in 2000. By 2000, only Australia, New Zealand, Ireland and Iceland had birth rates above replacement level. Most of the decline in birth rate occurred between 1970 and 1985, with a slight increase post-1985 in some OECD countries (the United States and Nordic countries). Across the OECD, two children is the norm, with many people delaying parenting until they have completed their educations, achieved financial independence, and are in secure jobs and secure relationships. Higher levels of education, greater difficulties in achieving financial independence than previous generations, significant levels of relationship breakdown, and higher levels of voluntary childlessness have all contributed to the declining birth rate (Sleebos 2003 Sleebos , Joelle. 2003 . Low fertility rates in OECD countries: Facts and policy responses . OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, 15. Available from http://www.oecd.org [Crossref] , [Google Scholar]). 2. For example, the Australian Treasurer, Peter Costello, in his 2004 budget speech, exhorted the nation's women to have three children: 'one for dad, one for mum, and one for the country'. 3. We are using the term 'biopolitics' as it derives from Foucault's work, to describe ways in which the bodily vitality of populations (labour power, fertility, sexuality, health) is enrolled in political and economic processes, and the ways in which states and institutions invest in this vitality. On Foucault's analysis, the body thus becomes the primary political medium for relations between state and population (Foucault 1979 Foucault , Michel . 1979 . Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison . Translated by Alan Sheridan . Harmondsworth : Peregrine Books . [Google Scholar], 2003 Foucault , Michel . 2003 . Society must be defended: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–76 Mauro Bertani and Alessandro Fontana , translated by David Macey . London : Penguin Books . [Google Scholar]). 4. The recent introduction of a 'baby bonus' payment has coincided in Australia with a slight upturn in the birth rate. This is, however, in the context of a long-term decline. 5. In Australia and New Zealand, for example, the number of both pregnancies and live births involving ART trebled between 1994 and 2003 (Waters, Dean, and Sullivan 2006 Waters , Anne-Marie , Jishan Dean , and Elizabeth Sullivan . 2006 . Assisted reproduction technology in Australia and New Zealand 2003 . Assisted Reproduction Technology Series no. 9 . Sydney : AIHW National Perinatal Statistics Unit . [Google Scholar]). 6. Autopoiesis is the process whereby biological material is self-organising and self-generating. 7. The US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention report that in 2002 alone, donated oöcytes were used in 13,183 (11.4 per cent) of the 115,392 procedures involving assisted reproductive technology (Steinbrook 2006 Steinbrook, Robert. 2006. Egg donation and human embryonic stem-cell research. New England Journal of Medicine, 354(4): 324–26. [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®] , [Google Scholar]). 8. SCNT involves the creation of an embryo not by the usual fusion of egg and sperm but through the in vitro insertion of the nucleus of a cell from an adult's tissues into an oöcyte. The oöcyte has had its own nucleus removed to make way for the introduced nucleus. This creates an embryo with the genome of the adult from whom the nucleus was taken. Such an embryo could be used to develop embryonic stem cell lines with the genetic material of an adult donor, which could in turn be used to produce transplantable tissues genetically compatible with the donor. 9. States that currently allow SCNT research are Australia. Belgium, China, India, Israel, Singapore, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States (if privately funded). 10. The now discredited Professor Hwang's work in South Korea gives an indication of the ratios of oöcytes needed to make a viable blastocyst, and of blastocysts needed to strike a viable stem cell line. In one of his studies, 16 donors produced 242 oöcytes, which in turn produced 30 blastocysts and, finally, one cell line (Hwang et al. 2004 Hwang , Woo Suk , Young June Ryu , Jong Hyuk Park , Eul Soon Park , Eu Gene Lee , Ja Min Koo , Hyun Yong Jeon , Byeong Chun Lee , Sung Keun Kang , Sun Jong Kim , Curie Ahn , Jung Hye Hwang , Ky Young Park , Jose B. Cibelli , And Shin Yong Moon . 2004 . Evidence of a pluripotent human embryonic stem cell line derived from a cloned blastocyst . Science Online , 13 February. Available from www.science.com [Crossref] , [Google Scholar]). In more recent revelations, the Seoul University inquiry into Hwang's activities found that between November 2002 and November 2005 his laboratory used 2,061 oöcytes produced by 129 women, representing an average of 16 oöcytes each (Steinbrook 2006 Steinbrook, Robert. 2006. Egg donation and human embryonic stem-cell research. New England Journal of Medicine, 354(4): 324–26. [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®] , [Google Scholar]). 11. The chronic shortage of reproductive oöcytes in gift-oriented national donation systems is well documented. See, for example, Murray and Golombok (2000 Murray, C. and Golombok, S. 2000. Oöcyte and semen donation: A survey of UK licensed centres. Human Reproduction, 15(10): 2133–39. [Crossref], [PubMed] , [Google Scholar]) and Heng (2006 Heng, B. 2006. Alternative solutions to the current situation of oöcyte donation in Singapore. Reproductive Biomedicine Online, 12(3): 286–91. [Crossref], [PubMed] , [Google Scholar]) on the United Kingdom and Singapore, respectively. 12. An exception here is Mies (1998 Mies, Maria. 1998. Patriarchy and accumulation on a world scale: Women in the international division of labour, London: Zed Books. [Google Scholar]). 13. Gift systems for human tissues are the historical norm in most democratic states that regulate biotechnology. The origins of this norm lie in the post-war adaptation of military blood collection systems for civilian use, and their association with collective good and national belonging. The ethical superiority of gift systems has been recently drawn into question as commercial biotechnology companies use free gifting to source commercially valuable tissues, without recompense to donors. Hence the free giving of tissues is often the starting point for significant profit for biotechnology firms (Waldby and Mitchell 2006 Waldby , Catherine , and Robert Mitchell . 2006 . Tissue economies: Blood, organs and cell lines in late capitalism . Durham, NC : Duke University Press .[Crossref] , [Google Scholar]). 14. This is according to Adam Balen, a British professor of reproductive medicine, interviewed by The Observer (Barnett and Smith 2006 Barnett , Anthony , and Smith Helena . 2006 . Cruel cost of the human egg trade . The Observer , 30 April. Available from www.observer.guardian.co.uk [Google Scholar]). 15. Surrogate mothers are implanted with an already conceived embryo, and carry the fetus to term without making any genetic contribution of their own. 16. One business model for this kind of enterprise is the Bedford Stem Cell Research Foundation, founded in 1996 in the Boston area. The Foundation claims to be the first organisation in the world to solicit women to 'donate' oöcytes purely for research. Since 2000, it has recruited oöcyte vendors from the Boston area via newspaper advertisements, paying them about US$4,000 per procedure. According to Sexton (2005 Sexton , Sarah. 2005 . Transforming 'waste' into 'resource': From women's eggs to economics for women . Reprokult workshop, Femme Globale Conference, Heinrich Böll Foundation, Berlin, Germany, 10 September . [Google Scholar]), the majority of oöcyte providers for this program are unemployed women. The Foundation conducts research within its own laboratories, supplies research oöcytes to Advanced Cell Technology, and is set to supply other Boston area researchers. The website (www.bedfordresearch/org) emphasises the use of 'mild hormone stimulation' to avoid hyper-stimulation syndrome, and the generally high level of screening, informed consent and ongoing care provided for oöcyte suppliers (Vogel 2006 Vogel, Gretchen. 2006. Ethical oöcytes: Available for a price. Science, 313: 155 [Google Scholar]). 17. On this point, see Barnett and Smith (2006 Barnett , Anthony , and Smith Helena . 2006 . Cruel cost of the human egg trade . The Observer , 30 April. Available from www.observer.guardian.co.uk [Google Scholar]). 18. In her work on organ economies in India and South America, Scheper-Hughes (2001 Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. 2001. Commodity fetishism in organs trafficking. Body and Society, 7(2–3): 31–62. [Crossref] , [Google Scholar]) has shown how the 'extra' organ comes to be figured as an expendable commodity for those who literally have nothing left to sell but their bodies. Donna Dickenson makes the interesting point that the sense of ethical horror surrounding some of these technologies comes from the sense that the 'body' itself—both male and female bodies—is now available for commodification (2007). In this sense, she argues, the fear is that 'we are all becoming women now'. 19. For example, the differential value of white and non-white women's eggs, as analysed above, translates into a stratified labour market in biomedical labour, where the tissues supplied by the non-white woman are good only for experimental, therapeutic and non-reproductive purposes. Moreover, when couples travel to Southern European locations to buy eggs, it seems that their perception of the ethical nature of their actions depends on a presumption of generosity on the part of the other woman. As is typical in other tourist transactions, there is a willingness to believe that the other woman is motivated by a uniquely feminine, indeed maternal, desire to give rather than brute economic necessity. On this point, see Barnett and Smith (2006 Barnett , Anthony , and Smith Helena . 2006 . Cruel cost of the human egg trade . The Observer , 30 April. Available from www.observer.guardian.co.uk [Google Scholar]). 20. See numerous sex worker union websites such as those for Scarlet Scarlet Alliance . n.d Website. Available from www.scarletalliance.org.au [Google Scholar] Alliance (Australia) and the International Union of Sex Workers International Union of Sex Workers . n.d . Website. Available from www.iusw.org [Google Scholar] (UK based).

</div>