# Taming chaos: A foucauldian view of UN peacekeeping, democracy and normalization

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | Laura Zanotti |
| **Year** | 2006 |
| **Category** | Civil-military relations and security sector reform |
| **Case Study** | Spain |
| **Relevance Score** | Pending |
| **Citation Count** | 50 |
| **Source** | openalex |
| **DOI** | [10.1080/13533310500436524](https://doi.org/10.1080/13533310500436524) |

## Abstract

Abstract In confronting a proliferation of unpredictable post-cold war threats, UN peacekeeping attempts to maintain order by normalizing the international arena. Normality is identified with democracy; non-democratic regimes are considered as potential menaces. Pro-democracy peacekeeping is an instance of an international regime that aims at taming chaos through disciplinary and regulatory mechanisms directed at reforming the institutions of potentially disorderly states and at steering their behaviour through multiple mechanisms of surveillance and reward/punishment. However, international normalization encounters resistance. The article analyses the UN methods in Haiti and Croatia and recommends prudence in applying standardized instruments in diverse local situations. Acknowledgement The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations. Notes 1. Jean-Marie Guehénno, ‘The Impact of Globalization on Strategy’, in Chester Crocker, Fen Osler Hampson and Pamela Aall (eds), Turbulent Peace: The Challenges of Managing International Conflict, Washington, DC: United States Institute for Peace, 2001, pp.83–95. 2. ‘Microphysics of threats’ is used here in a way analogous to the use that Foucault made of the notion of microphysics of power to describe the decentralization and proliferation of points of exertion of power/resistance in the modern world. See Michel Foucault, Microphisique du Pouvoir, Paris: L'Arc, 1972. 3. Linked in general terms to ‘idealistic’ interpretations of international relations, democratic peace theories found their first formulation in Kant's Perpetual Peace (1795). In their modern versions, democratic peace theories offer two types of explanation of the linkages between democracy and international peace. Monadic propositions maintain that democracies are less inclined to violent behaviour, regardless of the regime type of their potential opponents. Dyadic propositions maintain that democracies, while being as war prone as non-democracies, do not go to war with other democracies due to cultural similarities and/or economic linkages. For a discussion of democratization theories, see Miriam Fendius Elman (ed.), Paths to Peace: Is Democracy the Answer?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997, pp.1–57. 4. See Øle Wæver, ‘Securitization and Desecuritization’, in Ronnie D. Lipschutz (ed.), On Security, New York: Columbia University Press, 1998, p.6. 5. In the 1990s political conditions were increasingly attached to the allocation of international aid, particularly ‘good governance’. See World Bank, Governance and Development, Washington, DC: World Bank, 1992; Governance, The World Bank Experience, World Bank, 1994; UNDP, Governance for Sustainable Growth and Equity: Report of International Conference, New York, 28–30 July 1997, New York: UN Publications, 1997. The subordination of international development aid to the need for developing countries to ‘take responsibility’ for their own development and promote good governance was restated in the UN Report of the International Conference on Financing Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002, and re-emphasized during the 2005 World Summit by numerous speakers (www.un.org/summit2005). For a discussion of political conditionality in the 1990s, see Gordon Crawford, Foreign Aid and Political Reform: A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance and Political Conditionality, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001. 6. In 1993 the EU established the ‘Copenhagen Criteria’ as a benchmark to be achieved by Eastern European countries prior to admission, including democratic, minority and human rights guarantees and the existence of a functioning market economy (http://europa.eu.int/comm/enlargement/intro/criteria.htm). 7. Michel Foucault, ‘Governmentality’, in Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon and Peter Miller (eds), The Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality, with two lectures by and an interview with Michel Foucault, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, p.87. 8. For a discussion of Foucault's approach to power, sovereignty and universalization of state models, see Andrew W. Neal, ‘Cutting Off the King's Head: Foucault's Society Must Be Defended and the Problem of Sovereignty’, Alternatives, Global, Local, Political, Vol.29, No.4, 2004, pp.373–98. 9. Michel Foucault, ‘Society Must be Defended’: Lectures at the Collége de France, 1975–1976, New York: Picador, p.30, quoted in Neal (ibid.). Foucault also develops this notion of plural, infinitesimal mechanisms in Microphisique du Pouvoir (see n.2 above). 10. This builds on the understanding of government proposed by Mitchell Dean ‘as an inventive strategic, technical and artful set of “assemblages” fashioned from diverse elements, put together in novel and specific ways, and rationalized in relation to specific governmental objectives and goals’. See ‘Introduction: Government, Liberalism, Society’, in Mitchell Dean and Barry Hindess (eds), Governing Australia: Studies in Contemporary Rationalities of Government, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 11. Foucault's elaboration of the emigration of disciplinary mechanisms from total institutions into the social body has been discussed by Francois Ewald, ‘A Power Without an Exterior’, in T.J. Armstrong (ed.), Michel Foucault Philosopher, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992. 12. Michel Foucault, ‘Lecture at the Collége de France of 29 January 1975’, in Valerio Marchetti and Antonella Salomoni (eds), Abnormal: Lectures at the Collége de France 1974-1975, London: Verso, 2003, pp.81–107, 94. 13. See Pasquale Pasquino, ‘Theatrum politicum: The Genealogy of Capital – Police and the State of Prosperity’, in Burchell, Gordon and Miller (see n.7 above), pp.105–18. 14. Security Council Resolution on the question concerning Haiti, S/RES/940 (1994) of 31 July 1994. 15. UN, Les Nations Unies et Haïti, 1990–1996. Avec une introduction de Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secrétaire Général de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, New York: Département de l'Information des Nations Unies, Série Livres Bleus des Nations Unies, Volume XI, 1996, p.3. 16. S/RES/940 (1994) (see n.14 above). The Security Council stressed ‘systematic violation of civil rights’ by the ‘illegal de facto regime’ and the tragic situation of Haitian refugees. It also reiterated the commitment of the international community to assist Haiti's economic, social and institutional development and underlined that the goal of the international community was to restore democracy and to assure the prompt return of the legitimately elected president within the Governors Island framework. 17. It must be noted that before the 1990s the few UN interventions with an institution-building or democratization component were conducted in the framework of ‘decolonization’ processes and not because of a connection between democracy and international security. 18. UN General Assembly, ‘The Situation of Democracy and Human Rights in Haiti’, Resolution, A/RES/47/20B of 20 April 1993. MICIVIH was deployed in conjunction with the Organization of American States. 19. Ibid. 20. Ibid. A/RES/50/86B of 12 April 1996, which extended MICIVIH's mandate until 31 Aug. 1996, and Resolution A/RES/50/86C of 29 Aug. 1996. The mandate of MICIVIH was subsequently repeatedly extended until 13 Dec. 1999, with no substantial changes. 21. S/RES/940 (1994) (see n.14 above). 22. Security Council Resolution S/RES/1063(1996) of 28 June 1996 established the UN Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH). 23. The Haitian administrative situation, the penal, judiciary and police system, and the UN plans for reform are discussed in: MICIVIH, Le Système Judiciaire en Haïti. Analyse des Aspects Pénaux et de Procédure Pénale, May 1996; Les Prisons en Haïti, Rapport, July 1997; The Haitian National Police and Human Rights, Report, July 1996 (all accessed at www.un.org/rights/micivih/renforen.htm); and in UN Development Programme, Premiers Eléments de la Mission de Justice PNUD. Préambule: La Justice en Haïti. Le système des Nations Unies- Analyse des Actions et Recommandations, unpublished draft, 1999. 24. MICIVIH, Le Système Judiciaire en Haïti (see n.23 above), p.13. 25. Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, York: Vintage Books, 1995 (2nd edn), p.38. 26. See also UN General Assembly, Report of the Secretary General, A/55/618 of 9 Nov. 2000. 27. ‘Instead of treating the history of penal law and the history of human sciences as two separate series whose overlapping appears to have had on one or the other … a disturbing or useful effect … see whether there is not some common matrix or whether they do not both derive from a single process of “epistemologico-juridical” formation; in short, make the technology of power the very principle of both of the humanization of the penal system and of the knowledge of man’, Foucault, Discipline and Punish (see n.25 above), p.23. 28. For a discussion of modern modalities of government that supplanted medieval sovereignty, see Foucault (n.7 and n.25 above); and James Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998. 29. Foucault, Discipline and Punish (see n.25 above), p.94. 30. Foucault (see n.25 above). 31. Alessandro Pizzorno, ‘Foucault and the Liberal View of the Individual’, in Armstrong (see n.11 above), pp.204–11, 210. 32. Foucault (see n.7 above). 33. Scott (see n.28 above). 34. For analyses of governmentality as a method of Western governments, see Mitchell Dean, Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society, London: Sage, 1999; Michael Moran, The British Regulatory State: High Modernism and Hyper-Innovation, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003; Nicholas Rose, Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 35. Rose (see n.34 above). 36. Security Council Resolution S/RES/1037(1996) of 15 Jan. 1996. 37. See Hans Correl, ‘Note to Mr Guehénno, Croatia: Status of “Erdut Agreement”’, UN internal document, 21 June 2001. This note, which was circulated by the UN Liaison Office in Croatia to the Zagreb-based international partners, reconfirmed the continuing validity of the provisions of the Erdut Agreement after the end of peacekeeping. 38. Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Eastern Sirmium, art. 10–11. 39. In July 2001 the Commission included the ambassadors of Austria, Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Russian Federation, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the European Union, the rotating EU Ambassador, the OSCE Head of Mission, the Head of the European Union Military Monitor Mission and the Head of the UNHCR. 40. Letter, 13 Jan. 1997, from the Government of Croatia addressed to the President of the Security Council, S/1997/27, annex, commonly referred to as ‘Letter of Intent’. 41. Ibid., para.4. 42. Ibid., para.7. 43. Declaration on Educational Certificates (11 March 1997); Agreement on the Distribution of Principal's Positions (4 Aug. 1997); Decision on Curriculum Content (4 Aug. 1997); Declaration on Minority Education Rights (6 Aug. 1997); Letter of Agreement of the Ministry of Education (7 Aug. 1997). 44. Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional Administration in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. S/1997/953 of 4 Dec. 1997, Annex 1. 45. These are: Affidavit on the Rights of Public Employees (16–18 Dec. 1996); Annex to the Affidavit (14 Feb. 1997); Law on Convalidation (22 Sept. 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Highway Administration (21 March 1997); Letter of Agreement by Croatian State Radio and Television (2 April 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Post and Telecommunications Administration (9 May 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Water Administration (22 May 1997); Agreement by the Croatian Pension Fund on Pension Services (29 May 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Railways (6 June 1997); Agreement by the Ministry of Health on Regional Health Services (6 June 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Electricity Company (22 July 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Croatian Forestry Commission (26 June 1997); Declaration on Educational Certificates (11 March 1997); Agreement on the Distribution of Principals' Positions (4 Aug. 1997); Decision on Curriculum Content (4 Aug. 1997); Declaration on Minority Education Rights (6 Aug. 1997); Letter of Agreement by the Ministry of Education (7 Aug. 1997); Joint Statement on the Reintegration of the Tax Department (4 Sept. 1997); Joint Statement on Reintegration of the Employment System (11 Sept. 1997); Joint Statement on Reintegration of the Social Welfare System (11 Sept. 1997); Agreement on Recognition and Handover of Record Books (25 Sept. 1997); Memorandum of Understanding on Restructuring the Transitional Police Force (undated); Agreement on the Joint Working Group on Returns (23 April 1997); Organization of the Joint Council of Municipalities (23 May 1997); Declaration on Conditions for Judicial Reintegration (19 Sept. 1997). 46. Commission of the European Communities, ‘Croatia: The Stabilization and Association Process (SAP), First Annual Report’, Report from the Commission, Brussels, 4 April 2002, COM(2002)-163 final (executive summary). 47. Commission of the European Communities, ‘Croatia: Opinion on the Application of Croatia for Membership of the European Union’, Brussels, 20 April 2004, COM(2004)-257 final. 48. Ibid. 49. Ibid. 50. Croatia became a candidate for EU membership in October 2005, and in December Ante Gotovina was captured in Tenerife. These are unarguably positive developments. The street protests that followed Gotovina's capture, however, signal that this matter may contribute to reinforce political polarization instead of reconciliation. With regard to other pending issues, in its November 2005 report the OSCE estimates that, with the exception of a few cases still pending, the property repossession process should be completed in the first trimester of 2006. However, a housing solution still has to be found for the some 30,000 Croatian Serbs who lived in former socially owned apartments. According to the same source, progress with regard to minority discrimination has been slow. National minorities are still underrepresented in the police workforce, where only two per cent are from minority groups (as compared to 7.5 per cent in the population). See Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe OSCE Mission to Croatia. Status Report No. 17 on Croatia's progress in Meeting International Commitments Since July 2005, 10 November 2005. 51. UN General Assembly. Report of the Secretary-General. UN International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti, A/55/618 of 9 Nov. 2000. 52. Ibid. 53. I take issue here with ‘good governance’ approaches to development, which see the indiscriminate transplanting of Western institutional modalities into totally different contexts as the first step to development and the key to peaceful national societies and international relations. In the 1990s, the UNDP had started a reflection on good governance and its role in fostering development. Good governance emerged as the result of a critical revision of theories which considered economic factors as the main components of development. These include the ‘trickle down’ theories in the 1960s, the ‘basic need’ approaches of the 1970s and the ‘structuralist’ approaches of the 1980s. For the UNDP, the failure of all these approaches is due to the fact that they did not take into account the political dimension of development. Underdevelopment was now blamed on institutional malfunctioning, and the central concern of the UNDP in order to tackle the issue was the modernization of the institutions of the state. See UNDP (n.5 above). For a debate on democratic peace theories, see Miriam Fendius Elman (ed.), Paths to Peace: Is Democracy the Answer?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. 54. Colin Granderson, ‘Institutionalizing Peace: The Haiti Experience’, presentation at the Aspen Institute conference on ‘Honoring Human Rights: From Peace to Justice’, Mohonk Mountain House, New Paltz, New York, 12–14 Sept. 1997, p.28. 55. Ibid. 56. The government's interests and resistance have to a certain extent also played a role in making the UN task more difficult. But they were probably not the major factor in the face of the huge discrepancy between the institutions proposed by the UN and the local socio-economic situation. 57. Roland Paris argues that the reason for the failure of UN post-cold war peacekeeping was insufficient institutionalization. The case of Haiti, however, seems to show that too much institutionalization without sufficient supporting resources was the problem. See Roland Paris, At War's End: Building Peace After Civil Conflict, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 58. For Gilles Deleuze each social apparatus ‘has its way of structuring light, the way in which it falls, blurs and disperses, distributing the visible and the invisible, giving birth to objects which are dependent on it for their existence, and causing them to disappear’. Regimes of enunciations ‘must be defined from the point of view of that which can be enunciated, with the drifting, transformations and mutations which this will imply’. Gilles Deleuze, ‘What is a dispositif?’, in Armstrong (n.11 above), p.160. 59. In this regard I dissent from François Debrix, who sees in the failure of the UN in Bosnia and Somalia the premises for a fading role of the organization in maintaining world order. See Debrix, Re-Envisioning Peacekeeping: The United Nations and the Mobilization of Ideology, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999. 60. I modify here a formulation by Francois Ewald, ‘A Power Without an Exterior’, in Armstrong (n.11), pp.169–75. 61. Ibid.
