# Trade, Migration, and Welfare: The Impact of Social Capital

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Maurice Schiff |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 1999 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Trade liberalization and foreign direct investment |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Czech Republic |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 32 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1596/1813-9450-2044](https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-2044) |

## چکیده

No AccessPolicy Research Working Papers25 Jun 2013Trade, Migration, and Welfare: The Impact of Social CapitalAuthors/Editors: Maurice SchiffMaurice Schiffhttps://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-2044SectionsAboutPDF (0.1 MB) ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack Citations ShareFacebookTwitterLinked In Abstract:January 1999 The South gains by freeing trade and the North by restricting immigration. The South should liberalize trade, and the North should impose an immigration tax. Despite the predictions of standard trade theory, countries in the North are not indifferent about free migration and free trade. Migration has become a major concern in some OECD countries. But is migration really a threat? If tree trade is optimal, shouldn't free migration be optimal as well? Why do so many countries advocate free trade but restrictions on international migration? Wellisch and Walz (1998) have shown that there is no inconsistency in advocating free trade at the same time as restricting migration under redistributive policies in the rich countries. Schiff argues that this holds in the presence of social capital as well. South-North migration affects social capital in both places. The movement of people differs from the movement of goods and services in that people create attachments with those with whom they share social capital (including norms, language, customs, values, and culture) and interact with them at lower cost. So migration generates externalities. Schiff identifies four types of externalities associated with migration. He examines the impact of trade and migration policies under alternative assumptions about internalizing these externalities and concludes that the South always gains by freeing trade and the North by controlling immigration. These policy recommendations improve the distribution of income by improving the welfare of labor relative to that of capital. Trade liberalization in the South results in higher wages (and social capital) and lower returns to capital. An immigration tax in the North has no impact on capital, but labor gains from collecting the tax (and from higher social capital). This paper-a product of Trade, Development Research Group-is part of a larger effort in the group to understand the links between migration and trade. The author may be contacted at [email protected]. Previous bookNext book FiguresreferencesRecommendeddetailsCited bySYRIAN IMMIGRATION EFFECT ON SOCIAL CAPITAL IN TURKEY: EMPIRICAL STUDYYönetim ve Ekonomi Araştırmaları Dergisi15 September 2023The Economies of Urban Diversity: An IntroductionMigration and trade union rightsSwiss Journal of Economics and Statistics, Vol.146, No.426 December 2010Análisis regional de las remesas y sus perceptores en México, 2000 y 2005Estudios Fronterizos, Vol.10, No.191 January 2009Studying social capital in situ: A qualitative approachTheory and Society, Vol.35, No.1Communities, Social Capital and Public Policy: Literature ReviewSSRN Electronic JournalGovernance and Migration in a South-North PartnershipSSRN Electronic JournalLiberalising the Movement of Natural Persons: A Lost Decade?The World Economy, Vol.27, No.327 February 2004Refugees and National Identity: National Identity and Eritrean Refugees in the SudanSSRN Electronic JournalA nation 'living in different places': Notes on the impossible work of purification in postcolonial Sri LankaContributions to Indian Sociology, Vol.37, No.1-226 July 2016Social Capital and Networks: A Proposal for Conceptual IntegrationSSRN Electronic Journal View Published: November 1999 Copyright & Permissions Related Regions Europe and Central Asia Related Countries Czech Republic India South Africa Timor-Leste Related Topics Communities & Human Settlements Culture & Development Gender Health Nutrition and Population Macroeconomics and Economic Growth Private Sector Development Social Development Social Protections and Labor KeywordsCONSEQUENCES OF MIGRATIONETHNIC GROUPSFAMILY STRUCTUREFEWER PEOPLEHUMAN CAPITALIMMIGRANTSIMMIGRATIONIMMIGRATION POLICYIMPACT OF MIGRATIONINTERNATIONAL MIGRATIONLEGAL IMMIGRATIONMIGRATIONMIGRATION POLICIESMOVEMENT OF PEOPLEPOLICIESPOLICY ANALYSISPUBLIC SERVICESREMITTANCESSOCIAL NORMSSOCIAL STRUCTURE PDF DownloadLoading ...

</div>