# Central European Civil-military Relations And Nato Expansion

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Jeffrey Simon |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2004 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | روابط نظامی-غیرنظامی و اصلاح بخش امنیتی |
| **مطالعه موردی** | لهستان |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 24 |

## چکیده

Note: Opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University, the Department of Defense or any other government agency. CONCLUSIONS What Needs to Be Done? Poland. During 1988-June 1989, Poland effectively wrested the National Defense Council (KOK), which controlled the defense and interior ministries, from the communist party by placing it under de jure control of the president. Since April 1989 the KOK has been a collegial state organ subordinate to parliament. This is of immense importance because of Poland's experience with the defense council during the Pilsudski and 1980-81 martial law eras. After the June 1989 elections, parliament began to exert greater moral authority (reformers now controlled the Senate and one-third of the Sejm) and some oversight of the military. Two Solidarity civilians (Bronislaw Komorowski and Janusz Onyszkiewicz) became deputy defense ministers and began efforts to eliminate the Main Political Administration (communist party) from the military and to control contact with foreign states (in part, to ensure that the Soviet Union could no longer command Polish armed forces). Piotr Kolodziejczyk, an independent-minded admiral, became defense minister in July 1990. General Zdzsislaw Stelmaszuk, who had never attended a Soviet staff college, became chief of staff. President Jaruzelski resigned following the elections and requested that new presidential elections be held two-and one-half years early. After Lech Walesa was elected president in December 1990, power began to shift from parliament (the Sejm still had two-thirds communist membership) to the president. Not only did Walesa chair the KOK, which provided reformers with de facto control of the military and police, he also exercised oversight by attempting to change the KOK to a National Security Council and put it under presidential financial control. He further expanded his authority over the National Security Bureau (BBN), which developed Poland's military doctrine, developed threat analyses, and drafted the reforms to reorganize the defense ministry and restructure the General Staff. Poland's efforts to write a constitution during this period were frustrated by tensions between the communist-dominated Sejm on the one hand, and the Senate and president on the other. Frustrated with the Sejm, Walesa, like Jaruzelski, pushed for parliamentary elections two-and-one-half years earlier than planned. Following the October 1991 parliamentary elections, Poland's legislative and executive institutions were fully legitimate in democratic, political terms. However, a heavily fragmented and weak coalition government and the absence of a constitution became its Achilles heel. Ambiguity in authority and differences in interpretation over command and control caused the downfall of Poland's first civilian defense minister Jan Parys, then its prime minister, Jan Olszewski, and his government. Defense minister Onyszkiewicz initially brought new cooperation between the government and the president and some progress in defense ministry efforts to establish oversight of the military. In October 1992 he reformed the defense ministry into three departments (strategy, training, and logistics). Military courts and intelligence were subordinated to the civilian defense minister. Onyszkiewicz's attempts to fuse the civilian defense ministry financial and personnel services with the General Staff and Deputy Defense Minister Kuriata's attempts to set up an independent department to oversee military infrastructure and acquisition were frustrated when the General Staff effectively maintained autonomy by playing off civilian defense ministry oversight against the president. The so-called Small Constitution (November 1992) was a provisional effort to clarify legislative and executive authority that failed because of continued ambiguity. …

</div>