# The Role of Contextual Combinations in the Globalization of Chinese Firms. 情境性组合在中国企业全球化中的作用

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | John Child, Svetla Trifonova Marinova |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2014 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Privatization and state-owned enterprise restructuring |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Iran |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | در انتظار |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 132 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1111/more.12073](https://doi.org/10.1111/more.12073) |

## چکیده

This paper argues that it is crucial to take account of both home and host country contexts in order, adequately, to understand their implications for Chinese enterprises investing into foreign countries. This calls for an analysis that is sensitive to both home and host country contexts, and that takes into account how the institutions and political systems in those contexts establish institutional and resource capital needs for the overseas-investing firm. We discuss and illustrate three different combinations of Chinese and host country characteristics, and the firm-level learning and adaptation required in the light of the relevant capitals likely to be available to Chinese firms. The analysis draws upon insights from resource-based, institutional, and political perspectives. While it is developed with specific reference to China, we also suggest that this form of analysis can be applied more generally to the implementation of outward foreign direct investment from any country. 本文认为，同时考虑原籍国和东道国的情境对中国在外投资企业的影响是至关重要的。这就呼吁一种对原籍国和东道国的情境都很敏感的分析，这种分析考虑在那些情境下制度和政治体系如何建立海外投资企业所需要的制度和资源资本。我们探讨和展示了三种不同的中国和东道国特点的组合，以及中国企业现有的、相关资本要求的企业层次的学习和适应。这个分析基于资源依赖、制度的和政治的视角。虽然它是以中国为具体的参照而建立起来的，但我们也认为这种形式的分析能够被更广泛地用于任何国家的海外直接投资企业的实施。 The rapid expansion of outward foreign direct investment (OFDI) from China has been a new and significant development in international business during the past decade. The rise in China's OFDI was particularly marked after 2005 as its ‘go global’ strategy was consolidated and government restrictions were progressively eased to ensure political support for OFDI (Salidjanova, 2011). The China Investment Corporation was founded in 2007 as China's first sovereign wealth fund, to promote profitable overseas investments as an alternative to holding foreign currency reserves in low-yield US bonds. China's OFDI expanded from an annual flow of under US$100 million in the 1980s to approximately US$10 billion by 2005, surging to US$84 billion by 2012 (UNCTAD, 2013). Even in 2010, when global OFDI levels fell dramatically as a result of the financial crisis, Chinese non-financial OFDI recorded a year-on-year increase of 25.9 percent. It represented 5.1 percent of global OFDI flows placing the country as the fifth largest provider of OFDI in the world (Ministry of Commerce, 2011; Peoples' Bank of China, 2011; The Heritage Foundation, 2012). By 2012 Chinese OFDI stock had reached an estimated US$509 billion (UNCTAD, 2013). The marked increase in China's OFDI has understandably attracted growing attention among both academics and politicians. It raises a number of important theoretical and policy issues (Alon, Child, Li, & McIntyre, 2011). To date, more attention has been given to the motives behind Chinese OFDI than to how it is negotiated and implemented in different host country contexts (e.g., Buckley, Clegg, Cross, Xin, Voss, & Zheng, 2007; The Economist, 2013). China has been seen to qualify, even challenge, the conventional analysis that the internationalization of firms is motivated by opportunities to capitalize on ownership, location, and internalization (OLI) advantages. It has been asked whether we need an alternative analysis that is better suited to emerging economies in which firms may not possess such advantages (Boston Consulting Group, 2011; Child & Rodrigues, 2005; Dunning, 2006; Marinov & Marinova, 2011; Mathews, 2006; Narula, 2006; Ramamurti & Singh, 2009; Rugman, 2009). One reason why China can be regarded as a different case concerns the suspicion that the motives for its overseas investment are informed by a political agenda. The heavy state guidance of much Chinese OFDI suggests that it is an orchestrated arm of the country's foreign policy, motivated by the country's strategic interests (Luo, Xue, & Han, 2010; Zhang, Zhou, & Ebbers, 2010). The assumption that this is the case has led to opposition to Chinese acquisitions in Australia and the US (Hanemann & Rosen, 2011; Scott, 2009) and to debate over the motives for, and impact of, Chinese investment in sub-Saharan Africa (Brautigam, 2010; Van Dijk, 2009). this the motives for Chinese OFDI to both its home and host country It is the of, and for, this paper that it is crucial to take account of both home and host country contexts in to understand their implications for Chinese enterprises investing into foreign countries. The to which the internationalization of Chinese firms has been by support from their home as as their to to in their host contexts, attention than It is to a that this analysis and also to how it can of the advantages and Chinese OFDI as as the that foreign investing Chinese firms may to We that such a for OFDI from emerging economies by government are to this and rise to the that The first is for a more of than has generally been in international business The of home and host country contexts relevant to internationalization need to be a more of a needs to be to the in the & Rodrigues, 2010). This the of institutional and political of country It of the of business systems in different much international business business and the and the country levels of This is in a such as China, on to the largest The of the Chinese state in internationalization policy, and its can to on host country for Chinese firms of a that be to countries. can host country and firms from and and the institutional and political of country a is that account be of both home and host country contexts attention to the implications of different combinations of the that are by in host country While attention has been given to the the home and host we the implications for foreign of specific combinations of home and host country contexts & 2012). It is the of home and host advantages and and that the under which firms & Li, the and that are available in their and host contexts as as the institutional capital available to the firms. is to an of the to the resource capital and institutional capital required for OFDI in a of home and host country characteristics, and whether capitals can be from the home host country capital in the of internationalization to the and that a for in a foreign host country. It the of its foreign and the it in capital to the to with and foreign institutions in that also international of the be with reference to The motives for OFDI are relevant to this particularly whether internationalization is motivated by by opportunities for in the as with OFDI into the resource capital required be that for and the the to may be an of and to in global may also be The that is whether the resource and institutional capitals to support OFDI by Chinese firms are available from to be from the host country. this that account needs to be of both home and host country The we the need to a on the in international business with that on the analysis that in to 2013). The of is that the of Chinese firms calls for an analysis that the implications for the of Chinese OFDI from different combinations of home and host country such analysis take account of how the institutions and political systems in those contexts establish for both institutional and resource capital on the of the overseas-investing firm. also needs to be of the of such as and for Chinese firms impact both on their motives for OFDI and on how can to host country of is given in It draws upon insights from resource-based, institutional and political perspectives. While we the with specific reference to China, we also suggest that it can be applied more generally to the implementation of OFDI from any country. of the The the of China's government we a for the political and institutional of home and host country This is applied to different combinations of foreign and Chinese country and implications for Chinese foreign investing business are we Chinese OFDI firm-level in the case of developed and host country the implications of for and is in the of Chinese OFDI as as in its It is and in were Chinese foreign investments in and (Ministry of Commerce, 2012). By the largest stock of OFDI has to a of that is to be we and the stock of Chinese OFDI as of among the host the and the Africa for a growing stock of Chinese While Chinese overseas investments attracted the is of investments of than US$10 of is the for Chinese OFDI 2007; & 2007; of Commerce, 2012). China's OFDI stock is developed it is also growing in emerging which are in and which in and Africa also China's OFDI stock is The largest is in business to promote the of Chinese The for the largest by the and and (Ministry of Commerce, 2011; The Heritage Foundation, 2012). different and levels of and the of which in host can an adaptation for Chinese investing firms. The of host country and is likely to be of of the country's OFDI has been by enterprises which a of China's 2011). investment by Chinese is by heavy government to ensure that foreign investments in those be to the country's development (Salidjanova, 2011; & 2012). The of OFDI by percent of the the of an is not and the of OFDI by enterprises is not The Chinese strategy has been and for for and on host country 2010). The of Chinese overseas-investing firms is significant it is with a different of support and from the home The of home for Chinese OFDI is on the of the firm. to the specific for Chinese can for Chinese firms in a foreign are more likely to be available to The in the of Chinese OFDI and its different and of needs to be into account it has implications for the host country that Chinese firms for the of support are likely to from their home for the are likely to in their foreign and for the required to such the of host for China's OFDI different into This the how to country in a that is relevant for The of for to is how to is in as that form the for an and in of which it can be The is that such a can to the the of different The of country and been in the It is that of country are also relevant for political and institutional in host has been regarded as to OFDI as it and (e.g., While is a that we in its and is not suggests that political can be as the of in a political the of political The Bank its of and of on of the that the government be by and The is on that been to and political 2009). are the of of political the of that and that are consolidated with the in of in The the that political not with the of in a country. suggests that more in of foreign investment in their than that are 2009). the a country's political can be to be its in government are and the of different to a in which a country's such as its and in a to that are applied in a to While institutions are to are from political of institutional is that institutional and The annual country of of in of an of institutional The such as of a new a and a The Bank that from the of of the developed economies of the for and are the those of sub-Saharan Africa and are the While impact political and institutional are not the may in the to in a that political for more institutional to be institutional can political by and This is the of the with the the and of is in a of of the of and which their and a The of a for political and increase political even political and institutional are in the is of the for are in which not institutions for an business in a country that is political in of a of the and more political is on the of an this may in the country's this it is to the This rise to the combinations in which a to their political and institutional from analysis informed by the of political and institutional a for the and for Chinese firms of home and host country are that such firms to for to political and institutional in host to levels of may be to By and may to Chinese OFDI by political developed systems for The and of the also implications for the and required to the that are available to the impact of may be by Child, & 2011). the home for we China into of This is more for political than it is for institutional China of a for the 2012 on the and of This suggests that China is a country that has political and the and interests and those of a The also to by and the the of China has a of political the and it has also a of 2011). the on by the this of not and it has in the past China of on the of which institutional The country's institutional from the for the of institutional to be to political and by government and It also a of to and This home country has important implications for the of Chinese firms. are of and can be upon as the foreign investment with strategic that and host countries. OFDI government is available to firms in the form of support and business from Chinese firms the foreign 2010). are significant in host country that and are such as the the of with the Chinese government has a political to Chinese firms opportunities for the of the China as the home country for firms. The that institutions for Chinese firms also been to be a that such firms to to foreign & & is that it is the of home and host country contexts that are particularly for Chinese OFDI and we can such combinations in of the in in the is a by the case of and it not be We with the which into of the as a host country for Chinese host into the and the of the the host country for Chinese firms is in its home can be for China as the home of investing firms opposition on of its of and state which of the investment of their country's institutional & 2009). for opposition in the US to Chinese OFDI in China's to foreign investment and its for investment to 2013). the of the political in the US it for opposition to be and more for foreign investment to be has been to in the US and has been as US opposition from the Chinese its of in with a by the US on to in to the in and and business in of acquisitions of firms that the has with the Chinese financial support from the Chinese and a to the US that not business with and a Chinese and that not be to with firms on the that their to the Chinese government a of 2012). Chinese firms to in host contexts is by and Chinese are not with how to in a and institutional The of and that are in such with those in of issues by the of China and the US as home and host contexts for Chinese of the on Investment has the for such OFDI to be more in the US and countries. China and of both for its and for The is that China's and are not with the of Chinese to in the US and country and of both for its also for which from of the has on policy and to more over whether are to international in Chinese firms to more of the that in such host firms need to the that with in a foreign how how to Chinese need to understand how in a with institutional systems those in the Chinese need to be on how to the of in This whether Chinese OFDI in the US be in of China, by a of political with institutional in such are in the political and are informed by political in business is and not While and been that may to international their and implementation is and to the host country for Chinese OFDI is in of its home is of the in the political and institutional This the learning that Chinese firms to institutional capital in those in of how to to are reached the Chinese and host by Chinese which to institutional to the of Chinese investing firms. The are reached with and and as a result can be upon over the of the an of the to Chinese OFDI of the of as the home and host Chinese OFDI to that country has by 2012 2012). While the and of a for Chinese the country's political and institutional also its has had the political its in which The country's to be than in of their and its Bank in of of business Chinese government particularly foreign an alternative for the foreign from the interests of Chinese firms when the political and institutions of the country not foreign the support of the for Chinese investments by a for both The Chinese government to much and for Chinese state firms. The government financial from China that can to for the of for of the government and their and are given the from the global financial sub-Saharan into of in this are by that are in political and are by political are in and on are and to institutional systems are with and a host country of this Chinese firms may be to from their government with politicians. such may be to which from be by their host country from The Chinese its is the important for Chinese for on investment and crucial support to establish with and the The is the arm of the Chinese political and it is in investment & Chinese may with host more than those from the institutional capital that is can of political and and the of outward investment and the of the for Chinese OFDI in Africa are as as of political 2011). to and not to whether a is It that any which the is a be a even this was not in the the was & The stock of Chinese OFDI in sub-Saharan Africa that in and it is growing and the the largest The Chinese policy that this investment has attracted China is seen as the as the in the This new with the by and the the Chinese government a for not for the that it is to the Chinese to the for Chinese to a to their and their and with of and Chinese OFDI in Africa has a sensitive that has a debate over whether the Chinese to development is more than that from the to the of new and the of as of Chinese The for Chinese firms investing in Africa to their resource capital by on their and to a than is in host raises the of how host is relevant for firm-level and the case of China, home country are advantages that into advantages The of and the of such as in the of are the of and whether Chinese firms on the host country We that Chinese are for OFDI into emerging which is to the on to those firms that in with can for and that are negotiated the Chinese and the Chinese may be to institutional capital for their overseas-investing firms. the of Chinese with to emerging such as levels of political and an institutional and how to under such the case of host Chinese firms also possess and with This with the Chinese firms when investing into developed in of their and also institutional capital and are with the Chinese government may a as The as to developed and host country contexts for the institutional and resource capital required to support Chinese firms investing in contexts such as the in of with to institutional and resource are from their home be with the different and of institutions in the host country of which be on an of on may to be in a is an that be institutional capital is Chinese firms to to institutions and may need to and the of their resource capital may be by with and in the The from case of three of Chinese are with this that the a of to their and to of the also three in China and by and applied that the reason for this in of adaptation in how with the of the The firms in of and it was for to be with the support of in a country were as of China's By when firms the Chinese with in the from in of and those a in a developed country for this by with the to were of Chinese acquisitions in developed into of & 2011). Chinese such as and in developed to with institutions of which may also be and to and also in countries. to its and the case of it was that the to its with more global 2011). it a of the was with the systems and to and its 2005 of an and the that Chinese were not to a global by and the into the 2010). the and in the was by a Chinese of in the also the One has to be not to of and among Chinese firms investing in developed to in country contexts that the firms to resource Chinese investing in developed to a number of of which that need to take on to those of a developed country which of that to a of and that are to the of the of the Chinese investing are to in the developed the to and this also and the for is the for their Chinese firms also to the to global global in and an as to from that even Chinese firms may and are particularly for those Chinese firms investing in developed It is not to their foreign and to business and is a of adaptation when Chinese firms in host institutional are and are such their important institutional capital may in the that Chinese government can over host country The may Chinese firms to for resource by their resource a on their Chinese in sub-Saharan Chinese firms their even and Chinese Chinese as a of Chinese firms their from and and to their been that Chinese firms not with to the and are firms the direct of the Chinese state Dijk, 2009). is debate the of Chinese firms in Africa the by with of the reached in and is by Chinese on the it that in the host contexts that Chinese OFDI to be by of than is the case in The may also to this of the Chinese firms investing in are are This that not the and to to to global can more on their Chinese has that among on this is that the of is is and that the that the political and institutional of home and host country contexts is seen to establish whether not is likely to be a of the institutional and resource capitals that Chinese firms the analysis in this three of host country for Chinese the levels of relevant institutional and resource capital likely to be available from the and Chinese government It suggests that host into of with political on a and institutions Chinese firms with the institutional and resource learning be required in to to host institutions in that are regarded as as as to the home and host political as as in the of and to Chinese firms with to to of The of host Chinese country and firm-level into than advantages. By when host political in is more for Chinese to institutional capital on of their firms investing in those countries. the institutional and resource capitals are likely to be better suited to the host than is the case with countries. into of a of political and are also generally contexts the of resource capital in the form of and The and of firm-level learning and adaptation that firms from it may be by the has and of with the institutional of China, its home may institutional capital that is to the host such as a with and with and and with case when a host country is a of political and institutional as in after the of the the political to and the institutional that that firms from impact the development of the institutional for a such firms as which significant to Chinese firms may in a in contexts, which institutional the political of those host to Chinese as for such a the institutional and political capital available to the Chinese firms be in the may to for resource to understand both the in which Chinese OFDI is implemented and the for its we and that needs to be to take a account of the among relevant it is not the country that needs to the the among Chinese overseas-investing firms is also it are not in to their that may as of the country and in the of Chinese firms has implications for the to which their OFDI a in the form of support from home government and the that government over support and to be in the case of The to which the Chinese is also of for the strategic and it which on the whether it whether are available in the host country a Chinese and are not available in the host investment in a by the of the and to be more are available in the host the for investing a the in which firms are whether their internationalization is motivated by new as by opportunities to the to new the as with OFDI into the resource capital required be that for and to the is to the an to new may be an of and to in global may also be While are it is for the of and to the heavy on the that it has be this with reference to an and internalization of advantages to the of It is to on firms as when in political and institutional that can both and their firms may in their to to their and & Rodrigues, this is more likely in their home possess institutional and resource host country contexts, to such capitals may be by political such as and and by the of It may be for firms to institutional capital and a which can the of in and a from This has been the of Chinese firms in to advantages host country & Li, may This is not to that a may and for internationalization learning and it is to that the and it needs to to a foreign investment on the of that to the host country by political and institutional the The of is that on Chinese and OFDI from any needs to be developed as to and the of of of investing firms with both host country firms and It take account of relevant institutional and capital the of the home government in of the with host and the that account for of China's OFDI is this is not a to the world as a account for percent of global flows (UNCTAD, of the negotiated by host particularly on of enterprises be to firm-level and their the institutional of the host is the of with host that Chinese firms be from that the of The important in this and its is that in to OFDI and its we an analysis that is sensitive to both home and host country contexts, account of the of institutional and political that in those This that we to upon insights from resource-based, institutional and political we it is a of the different combinations of home and host country that an of the Chinese overseas-investing firms and how are likely to with analysis of country and the both to more as as to a better of policy for that foreign investment is Child and of is the of and and interests are in the of and the internationalization of firms. in such as of of of and and The of by a of how China's largest developed in to its political is an in interests the of institutions on the internationalization of firms from emerging economies and the of of has and more than in the in in and of

</div>