# Contemporary politics in the Middle East

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Beverley Milton‐Edwards |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2000 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Privatization and state-owned enterprise restructuring |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Iran |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | در انتظار |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 94 |

## چکیده

Preface to Third Edition. Introduction. What is the Middle East? Who invented the Middle East? Orientalism - the debate. State types - making sense of multiplicity. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 1. Colonial Rule. Introduction. Merchants and missionaries. World War I and the death of the Ottoman Empire. 1918 and after: mandates, protectorates and continued colonization. Inter-war European decline. Sunset empire. Case study: Egypt. Case study: The Palestine debacle. Case study: Algeria - a colony or province outre mer. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 2. Nationalism. Introduction. The development of nationalism. The birth of Arab nationalism. The Arab revolt. Arab nationalism and revolution. Unification nationalism - the United Arab Republic and beyond. Case study: Egyptian nationalism. Case study: Ba'thism - unification or state nationalism? Discussion Questions. Further reading. 3. Political Economy: Riches of a Region. Introduction. Rich man, poor man, beggar man, thief. Many models make poor work. Evolution of oil-based societies. Sheikhdoms and petro-power. Rentier future, profits in decline? On the wings of a dove - the migrant workforce. Case study: Mega-economy Kuwaiti style. Case study: Econo-dependent development Egyptian-style. Case study: The great globalization debate. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 4. War and Lack of Peace. Introduction. The bigger battle - Arab-Israeli hostility. Killing dreams - the Israeli-Palestinian dimension. East against West in the Suez Crisis. Arab-Arab - brothers at arms. The lion and the peacock: Arab-Iranian relations. Lebanon - the politics of a deeply divided society. Case study Egypt and Israel - the Cold Peace. Case study al-Qaeda. Case study Back to Iraq. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 5. Past, Present and Future Politics: Political Islam. Introduction. Islam and Politics. Thoroughly modern Muslims. Muslim Brotherhood. Radical and fundamentalist Islam. Twenty-first century Muslim. Case study The Islamic Republic of Iran. Case study Palestinian Islamists - Hamas. Case study Hizbollah. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 6. Democratization: Old Politics, New Problems. Introduction. Clash of civilizations. Democratization or liberalization? Socio-economic indicators. Democracy and civil society. Islam and democracy - an oxymoron? From democracy to ethnocracy in Israel. Case study Jordan - a facade democracy. Case study Algeria D the wrong kind of democracy. Case Study: Morocco model? Discussion Questions. Further reading. 7. Women: The invisible Population. Introduction. The role of women in nationalist movements. Identity and independence: status issues. Women and Islam. Subjugation through wealth and work. Feminism and gender discourse. Case study Palestinian women in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip. Case study From beyond the veil - Iran since the Revolution. Case study Turkey, the state of women. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 8. Ethnicity and minorities. Introduction. Defining ethnicity. Minority status. The state and ethnicity. Modernization. Ethno-national and religious battles. Conflict-management and regulation. Case study: The Kurds' rights denied. Case study: The Alawites of Syria. Case Study - Israel's Arabs. Discussion Questions. Further reading. 9. Them and Us: The United States, EU and the Middle East. Introduction. Objective national interest. Relations and rivalries. Burger bars and belly dancers. American foreign policy from ground zero. Europe, the EU and the Middle East. Case study America and Israel. Case study America and Saudi Arabia: oil on troubled waters. Case study D the US and Iran. Discussion Questions. Further reading. Epilogue. The colonial legacy? East-West relations. The future Arab nation. The political economy matrix. Carry on conflict. Political Islam: the politics of the future. Decline of democratization. Sisters doing it for themselves. Ethnic equations. Never Alone. References. Index.

</div>