# Religion and politics

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | John Madeley |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2002 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Religious freedom and separation of religion from state |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Iran |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | در انتظار |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 8 |

## چکیده

Religion and Regime: Daniel H. Levine (1986) Religion and Politics in Comparative and Historical Perspective Fred Halliday (1999) The Iranian Revolution in Comparative Perspective Anthony J. Gill (1994) Rendering unto Caesar? Religious Competition and Catholic Political Strategy in Latin America, 1962-79 John McGarry and Brendan O' Leary (1995) Warring Gods: Theological Tales Sarath Amunugama (1991) Buddhaputra and Bhumaputra? Dilemmas of Modern Sinhala Buddhist Monks in Relation to Ethnic and Political Conflict Srdjan Vrcan (1994) The War in Former Yugoslavia and Religion Stathis N. Kalyvas (1998) Democracy and Religious Politics: Evidence from Belgium. The Politics of Church-State Relations: N.J. Demereth III (1991) Religious Capital and Capital Religions: Cross-Cultural and Non-Legal Factors in the Separation of Church and State Nikkie R. Keddie (1997) Secularism and the State: Towards Clarity and Global Comparison Mark Juergensmeyer (1995) The New Religious State Gene Burns (1990) The Politics of Ideology: The Papal Struggle with Liberalism Eliezer Don-Yehiya (1987) Jewish Messianism, Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: The Impact and Origins of Gush Emunim John G. Francis (1992) The Evolving Regulatory Structure of European Church-State Relationships Juan J. Linz (1991) Church and State in Spain from the Civil War to the Return of Democracy. Religion and Electoral Politics: Kenneth Janda (1989) Regional and Religious Support of Political Parties and Effects on their Issue Positions Arend Lijphart (1979) Religion vs. Linguistic vs. Class Voting: The 'Crucial Experiment' of Comparing Belgium, Canada, South Africa and Switzerland John Madeley (1982) Politics and the Pulpit: The Case of Pretestant Europe Lauri Karvonen (1993) In From the Cold? Christian Parties in Scandinavia Steve Bruce (1990) Modernity and Fundamentalism: The New Christian Right in America Geoffrey C. Layman and Edward G. Carmines (1997) Cultural Conflict in American Politics: Religious Traditionalism, Postmaterialism and U.S. Political Behaviour Stephen White, Ian McAllister and OI'ga Kryshtanovskaya (1994) Religion and Politics in Postcommunist Russia. Religion, Public Policy and the Politics of Identity: Francis G. Castles (1994) On Religion and Public Policy: Does Catholicism Make a Difference? Kees Van Kersbergen and Uwe Becker (1988) The Netherlands: A Passive Social Democratic Welfare State in a Christian Democratic Ruled Society Howard Caygill and Alan Scott (1996) The Basic Law versus the Basic Norm: The Case of the Bavarian Crucifix Order Alice Holmes Cooper (1988) The West German Peace Movement and the Christian Churches: An Institutional Approach Brian Girvin (1986) Social Change and Moral Politics: The Irish Constitutional Referendum 1983 Talal Asad (1990) Multiculturalism and British Identity in the Wake of the Rushdie Affairs Elizabeth H. Prodromou (1996) Paradigms, Power and Identity. (Part contents). a

</div>