# The Babi and Baha'i community of Iran: A case of “suspended genocide”?

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Moojan Momen |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2005 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Judicial independence and rule of law |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Iran |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 27 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1080/14623520500127431](https://doi.org/10.1080/14623520500127431) |

## چکیده

Click to increase image sizeClick to decrease image size Notes 1 No adequate description of the persecution of the Babi and Baha'i religions in Iran has ever been given. The events of the early Babi period are covered in works such as Amanat (1989) Amanat, A. 1989. Resurrection and Renewal: The Making of the Babi Movement in Iran, 1844–1850, London: Cornell University Press. [Google Scholar]. Some documents relating to later persecutions can be found in Momen (1981) Momen, M. 1981. The Bábí and Bahá'í Religions, 1844–1944. Some Contemporary Western Accounts, Oxford: George Ronald. [Google Scholar]. See also Ghanea (2002) Ghanea, N. 2002. Human Rights, the UN and the Bahá'ís in Iran, Oxford: George Ronald. and The Hague: Kluwer Law International [Google Scholar] and Akhavan (1993) Akhavan, P. 1993. “Implications of Twelver Shi'ih Mihdism on religious tolerance: the case of the Baha'i minority in the Islamic Republic of Iran”. In Islamic Law Reform and Human Rights, Challenges and Rejoinders, Edited by: Vogt, K. and Lindholm, T. 197–218. Oslo: Nordic Human Rights Publications. [Google Scholar]. Two relevant papers in Persian are: Tavakkoli-Tarqi (2001) Tavakkoli-Tarqi, M. 2001. Baha'i setizi va Islam-gara'i dar Iran. Iran Nameh, 19(1–2): 79–124. [Google Scholar] and Afshari (2001) Afshari, R. 2001. “Naqz-e hoquq-e bashar-e Baha'iyan dar Jomhuri-ye Islami-ye Iran,”. Iran Nameh, 19(1–2): 151–164. [Google Scholar]. Most publications have dealt with the Baha'i persecutions in Iran as a matter of human rights violations rather than in relation to potential genocide. 2 In fact, a verdict was requested from some 38 Sunni and 10 Shi'i clerics convened in Baghdad for the trial. The Sunni majority in the court condemned the Bab and his emissary to death outright, but the Shi'is, probably worried about precedent that this might set for the Ottoman government, while condemning the Bab's teaching as heresy, were more cautious with regard to the punishment they advocated. 3 There are a number of primary Babi and Baha'i accounts of this episode in Persian. Zabihi-Moghaddam (2002) Zabihi-Moghaddam, S. 2002. The Bábí-state conflict at Shaykh Tabarsí. Iranian Studies, 35: 87–112. [Taylor & Francis Online] , [Google Scholar] discusses these sources. The government accounts can be found in the court histories: Muhammad-Taqí Sipihr, Násikh at-Tawáríkh, and Ridá-Qulí Khán Hidáyat, Rawdat as-Safá-yi Násirí; see summaries of these two sources in Browne (1891 Browne, E. G. 1891. A Traveller's Narrative Written to Illustrate the Episode of the Bab, Vol. 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [Google Scholar], pp 173–192). See also Nabil (1962 Nabil [Zarandi]. 1962. The Dawn-Breakers: Nabíl's Narrative of the Early Days of the Bahá'í Revelation, Edited by: Effendi, S. Wilmette: Bahá'í Publishing Trust. trans. [Google Scholar], pp 324–429). 4 The primary sources for the Zanjan episode are discussed in Walbridge (1996) Walbridge, J. 1996. The Babi uprising in Zanjan: causes and issues. Iranian Studies, 29: 339–62. [Taylor & Francis Online] , [Google Scholar]. Government accounts are in the sources mentioned in note 3. See also Nabil (1962 Nabil [Zarandi]. 1962. The Dawn-Breakers: Nabíl's Narrative of the Early Days of the Bahá'í Revelation, Edited by: Effendi, S. Wilmette: Bahá'í Publishing Trust. trans. [Google Scholar], pp 527–581). The primary sources for the Nayriz upheaval are utilized by Nabil (1962 Nabil [Zarandi]. 1962. The Dawn-Breakers: Nabíl's Narrative of the Early Days of the Bahá'í Revelation, Edited by: Effendi, S. Wilmette: Bahá'í Publishing Trust. trans. [Google Scholar], pp 465–499). Government accounts can be found in the sources indicated in note 3 and also in Fasá'í (1972 Fasá'í, H. 1972. History of Persia under Qajar Rule, Edited by: Busse, H. New York: Columbia University Press. trans. [Google Scholar], pp 290–294). 5 The following two lists are based on Ghanea (2002 Ghanea, N. 2002. Human Rights, the UN and the Bahá'ís in Iran, Oxford: George Ronald. and The Hague: Kluwer Law International [Google Scholar], pp 99–154, 280–393). These are drawn from statements made by representatives of the Baha'i community in Iran and by the Baha'i International Community to the Special Representative of the United Nations High Commission on Human Rights and accepted by him in his report. Similar information can be found in Baha'i International Community (1993 Baha'i International Community. 1993. The Bahá'í Question: Iran's Secret Blueprint for the Destruction of a Religious Community, New York: Baha'i International Community Publications. [Google Scholar]). 6 Document Doc.E/CN.4/1993/Add.1, Commission on Human Rights, 49th Session, February 5, 1993, Agenda item 12, quoted in Ghanea (2002 Ghanea, N. 2002. Human Rights, the UN and the Bahá'ís in Iran, Oxford: George Ronald. and The Hague: Kluwer Law International [Google Scholar], pp 345–346). 7 ”Iran plans a final solution,” Sunday Times, London, September 20, 1981, quoted in Ghanea-Hercock (1999 Ghanea-Hercock, N. 1999. “The interaction between the United Nations human rights system and the Bahá'ís of Iran (1980–1998)”. PhD, Department of International Relations, Keele University. [Google Scholar], p 105). 8 The situation in Iran is classified as Revolutionary/Repressive—that the action is being take against class or political enemies in the service of the revolutionary ideology or against political parties, factions and movements in order to repress opposition activity. This may apply to some degree to the Baha'is, although they are not a class or political enemy, but Harff and Gurr's category of xenophobic genocide would appear to be a better category for the Baha'is if they are considered separately from the Mujahedeen and Kurds. 9 Allen (1987 Allen, P. 1987. The Baha'is of Iran: a proposal for enforcement of international human rights standards. Cornell International Law Reports, 20: 337–361. [Google Scholar], p 346), citing note in International Commission of Jurists Review, Vol 4, 1981, p 5. 10 http://www.genocidewatch.org/genocidetable2003.htm (accessed April 20, 2004); http://www.endgenocide.org/genocide/bahai.html (accessed April 20, 2004). 11 http://www.endgenocide.org/genocide/bahai.html (accessed April 20, 2004). 12 Information received in September 2004 from informants in Iran.

</div>