# Hizballah: Between Iran and Lebanon

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | Tony Badran |
| **Year** | 2022 |
| **Category** | Political party formation and pluralism |
| **Case Study** | Iran |
| **Relevance Score** | Pending |
| **Citation Count** | 5 |
| **Source** | openalex |
| **DOI** | [10.5325/bustan.13.1.0117](https://doi.org/10.5325/bustan.13.1.0117) |

## Abstract

What is Hizballah, and how did it come to be? More than four decades after its birth, these questions largely are taken for granted in the literature on the group. As studies of Hizballah have become increasingly hyperspecialized, focusing on different aspects of the group’s organization, ideology, economy, military capabilities, and overseas operations, discussion of the genesis of the group has fallen into the background, becoming almost a de rigueur exercise. In a deeply informative new book, Shimon Shapira sheds a whole new light on this important subject. A major contribution to the field, Shapira’s Hizballah: Between Iran and Lebanon charts a new path for Hizballah scholarship.Generally speaking, the narrative of Hizballah’s genesis in the literature is as formulaic as it is teleological. It begins with a survey of the historically marginalized Shiʿi community of Lebanon, tracing its so-called political awakening and evolution. It stops at the milestone advent of the Iranian-Lebanese cleric Musa Sadr and his impact on the trajectory of the Lebanese Shiʿa. It then proceeds to describe the radicalization of Lebanese Shiʿa in the context of the Lebanese civil war, which began in the mid-1970s. The victory of the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran further inspires radicalization as various local Shiʿi clerics, many of whom had a connection to Najaf in Iraq, emerged to fill the vacuum after Sadr’s disappearance in 1978. This trajectory reaches its apex with the Israeli invasion of 1982, which triggers the birth of Hizballah, as these disparate radical Shiʿi networks coalesce and receive assistance from the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.The focus of the conventional narrative is Lebanon and Israel. As one recent book on the group put it, Hizballah is “a Lebanese idea.”1 And, according to this narrative, consistent with prevailing political exigencies, the raison d’être of Hizballah is resistance to Israel’s intervention in 1982.Since the turn of this century, a parallel area of research has focused on the activity in Lebanon of Iranian cadres in the various factions of the anti-shah opposition. These include clerical and other figures who would go on to assume senior positions in the post-revolutionary government and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). These figures were intimately involved in the birth of Hizballah.Tellingly, it was not Hizballah specialists who undertook this line of research, but Iranian historians. These historians examined the published memoirs of revolutionary figures active in Lebanon—sources that had not been consulted in the Hizballah literature, in part because of a lack of familiarity with Farsi sources among Hizballah observers, and in part because of the predominance of the aforementioned narrative.More telling still was that, in spite of these sources coming to light, a firewall continued to separate the two areas of research, namely the experience of Iranian cadres and the story of Hizballah’s birth. The two stories, while inextricably intertwined, were artificially compartmentalized, and whenever Iranian historians came close to breaking through that wall, they stopped short and deferred to the conventional narrative.2 Scholars seemingly were unable or unwilling to connect the dots and to take the connection to its end. It was as though too much was at stake in challenging the prevailing account. Shapira’s book bridges this artificial divide, opening new avenues for the study of the three-pronged relationship between Iran, Hizballah, and Lebanon.The book is divided into eleven chapters with an introduction and a conclusion, along with a useful index. The first chapter offers a historical background of Iranian-Lebanese relations, namely since the nineteenth century. Chapter 2 picks up in the 1950s and covers Iranian policy in Lebanon under the shah. It tackles the roles of SAVAK, the shah’s intelligence service, and Musa Sadr in that policy, particularly during the 1970s, when Lebanon became a hub for anti-shah opposition activity. The chapter devotes considerable attention to Sadr and lays out the two interlinked theaters in which he was active: the Lebanese Shiʿi community and Iranian politics.In Shapira’s treatment, Sadr’s local project was integrated with the Iranian dynamic and the interfactional competition of the anti-shah opposition groups active in Lebanon. The largest faction, which maintained close ties with the Palestinians, had a tense relationship with Sadr, leading to its involvement in his elimination in Libya in 1978.The activity of these factions in Lebanon in the 1970s is discussed in chapter 3. Here Shapira draws not only on the memoirs of Iranian operatives, but also on more recent testimonies and data from news sites affiliated with the Revolutionary Guards. He also integrates Arabic accounts of Lebanese figures associated with the Iranian opposition cadres who liaised between the Iranians and the Palestinians, and whose accounts provide first-hand testimony pertaining to key figures in Hizballah, their recruitment and training, and their relationship with the Iranian cadres in the mid- to late 1970s.In this context, Shapira provides a sketch of the role of an important but heretofore little-known Iranian-Iraqi operative by the name of Mohammad Saleh Hosseini. Hosseini sat at the confluence of Iranian Khomeinist cadres, Lebanese Shiʿi recruits, and the Palestinians, thereby giving him access to young Lebanese cadres like future Hizballah commander Imad Mughniyeh. Early in 1979, Shapira writes, Hosseini and Revolutionary Guards officers, the same cadres who had been active in Lebanon that entire decade, were already “seeking to establish an operational infrastructure in Lebanon,” recruiting young Lebanese Shiʿa. Hosseini brought Mughniyeh into that effort (104).Chapter 4 picks up with the victory of the Islamic revolution in 1979 and traces the new regime’s international politics with Lebanon, Iraq, Libya, Syria, and the Palestinians in the critical transitional period for the new Islamic Republic of Iran, between 1979 and 1981. During this time the struggle between the predominant militant clerical faction of the Islamic revolution, which coalesced in the Islamic Republic Party (IRP) and its domestic rivals—Sadr’s allies—is mirrored in the deterioration of the IRP’s ties with Sadr’s organization and allies in Lebanon. This tension wasn’t merely a matter of disagreement over the new regime’s foreign policy. Rather, it was integral to the violent power struggle at home from 1979 to 1981.Much as with the Shiʿi Amal movement that Sadr founded, the IRP’s tension with the Da’wa party in Lebanon over the question of Khomeini’s status as the leading marjaʿ (source of emulation) would soon follow. The Iran-Iraq war also increased friction with the Palestinians. All of these concurring developments fortified the aforementioned decision to establish a new, separate “operational infrastructure” in Lebanon. At the end of the chapter Shapira notes briefly that, immediately after taking up his position in Damascus in August 1981, the new regime’s ambassador, ʿAli Akbar Mohtashami, an IRP operative with long experience in Lebanon, held a meeting with pro-Khomeini Shiʿi clerics Subhi Tufayli, ʿAbbas Musawi, and Muhammad Yazbeck. This, in Shapira’s formulation, “was a founding event that laid the basis for a new Shi‘ite movement that accepted Imam Khomeini’s exclusive authority as its political and religious leader” (129). This was not the only meeting Mohtashami held with the Lebanese pro-Khomeini cadres that year. Lebanese sociologist Waddah Sharara mentions other consultations that Mohtashami held in 1981, including with Imad Mughniyeh, laying the groundwork for the new organization, Hizballah.3In fact, 1981 was a pivotal year. In March of that year, one of the architects of the 1970s recruitment of young Shiʿa and of the effort to set up a new “operational infrastructure,” Mohammad Saleh Hosseini, then a senior intelligence official at the Iranian embassy in Beirut, had been assassinated by the Iraqis. Later that summer Hosseini’s close associate in Lebanon, Mohammad Montazeri, was killed, along with other IRP leaders like Mohammad Beheshti, in a blast at the IRP headquarters. At the same time, however, 1981 marked the year the IRP, as Khomeini’s instrument, consolidated its grip on the post-revolutionary order in Tehran.The fact that the Khomeinist cadres were actively working on establishing a new organization well before summer of 1982 should put to bed the conventional narrative of Hizballah’s genesis. Having laid out this history, Shapira moves to discuss the developments of 1982 in chapter 5. When it comes to Israel’s military operation and its relation to the formal emergence of Hizballah, Shapira sees it merely as an accelerator of a plan already in motion—one driven by Iranian dynamics having little to do with Israel. Hizballah’s number 2, Naim Qassem, admitted this fact in a 2014 interview, in which he said that the establishment of the group happened “shortly before the [Israeli] invasion,” adding: “the formation of Hizballah was connected to the Israeli invasion, but the invasion was not the reason for its formation.”4The discussion in this chapter could have benefited from a slightly more elaborate explanation of the name Hizballah. Shapira notes that the name Hizballah “was the appellation of the military arm of the radical ʿulema in Iran headed by Hadi Ghaffari, who acted on behalf of the Islamic Republic Party” (153). This is true, and Qassem, in the same 2014 interview, acknowledged that the name of the group was “in emulation of Hizballah which existed in Iran.” But this is only part of the picture. The IRP used the name Hizballah, and the Quranic verse where it appears, to identify itself and, after it gained full power in 1981, its government (dowlat-e hezbollah). A photograph of Yasser Arafat at an IRP conference during his visit to Tehran in 1979 shows him sitting with IRP leaders under a banner with the Quranic verse: fa inna hizb Allah hum al-ghaliboun (Indeed, the party of Allah will be victorious). In other words, Hizballah in Lebanon was in emulation of the victorious Hizballah faction in Iran. This background augments Shapira’s history of Iranian factional dynamics in Lebanon and the thrust of his interpretation.The chapters up to this point form the core of the book’s thesis on the genesis and early history of Hizballah. They offer a wealth of new data from a plethora of sources that are not found or brought to bear in this manner in any other book on Hizballah.The following chapters deal with the institutions that the Iranians began building in Lebanon with Hizballah (chapter 6)—most of which were clones of postrevolutionary structures in Iran—and Hizballah’s ideology (chapter 7). The chapter picks up on the subject of Iran and Hizballah’s complicated relationship, later turned adversarial, with the late Lebanese cleric Muhammad Hussein Fadlallah, aspects of which were covered in earlier chapters.The chronological organization resumes in chapter 8, which discusses how Lebanon and Hizballah became an extension of the inter-elite competition within the ruling IRP in the mid- to late 1980s. It covers Ali Khamenei’s succession of Khomeini as Supreme Leader and his ties to Hassan Nasrallah, Hizballah’s current leader. As part of this intra-IRP competition, officials like Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani tried to reach out to the Da’wa party and to Amal. The importance of this episode lies in the fact that in the end the primacy of the Hizballah faction both in Tehran and Beirut remained unaffected, as evidenced by the rise of Khamenei and Nasrallah, as well as of the IRGC in Iran.The following two chapters deal with the years of Syrian control of Lebanon, covering the Hizballah entry into parliamentary politics all the way to Israel’s withdrawal in 2000 (chapter 9), and the 2006 war to the assassination of Imad Mughniyeh in 2008 (chapter 10). The book ends with a chapter on Hizballah’s involvement in the Syrian war and the changing nature of its conflict with Israel, and the role played by the recently departed IRGC commander Qassem Soleimani, bringing us to the present day.Iran’s and Hizballah’s entrenchment in Syria is a testament to the resilience and continuity of the Iranian revolutionary project in the Levant. In the conclusion, Shapira leaves us with the reality that, after a little over four decades since its founding, Hizballah now reigns supreme in Lebanon and has achieved its objective of fully integrating that country into the Iranian regional project.Shapira has provided a comprehensive historical survey and a fresh analytical framework backed by a wealth of data. His book will serve as the reference point for all future studies on the history of Hizballah and the nature of its ties to Iran.
