# The Context of Inter-Governmental Relations in Zimbabwe Reflections from the Constitution of Zimbabwe Amendment Number 20 Of 2013

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | C. Vincent |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2015 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Federalism, unitarism, and autonomy models |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Iran |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 1.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 0 |

## چکیده

Zimbabwe is politically and constitutionally a unitary, democratic and sovereign state with a three tier governmental structure: national government; provincial and metropolitan councils, and local government (rural district councils and various types of urban councils) according to the Constitution [Amendment No. 20] of 2013. This paper explores the composition, structure and the legal basis of the three tiers of government. Diagrammatic illustrations were used to depict these tiers more elaborately, highlighting focal points of power, authority, accountability and responsibility and how the system is synergised and synchronised from the national to the lower levels. Brief historical reviews are additionally used to locate the transformation of these structures through the vicissitudes of colonial discriminatory and racist structures to post independent African government supposedly modelled to dismantle the colonial system with fair, impartial and equitable structures established on the basis of human rights, improved access for all with important non racist, non ethnic codes and disregarding colour or creed. IGR and cooperative government: A conceptual framework. In its most elementary context, the elasticity of the term IGR can be conveniently located in Anderson‟s (1960;3) definition as, „an important body of activities or interactions occurring between governmental units of all types and levels‟. Wright (1988) concurred with Anderson‟s (1960) definition but further reinforced the centrality of interactions among various institutions at different levels in order to promote coherence, coexistence and cooperation. Cameron (1994) gave a geographical jurisdictional perspective of IGR defining it as the geographical delineation of powers among the distinct spheres of government in a government system. The division of powers implies the uniqueness and independence of different levels of government in the intergovernmental domain. To Elazar (1987), the concept is not a replacement of historical concepts as federalism and unitarism, but a supplement allowing for the growing realities of politics and administration as governments have expanded. According to Opeskin (1998), the term IGR simply refers to relations between central, regional and local governments that facilitate the realisation of common objectives through cooperation. A summation of the conceptual elasticity of IGR however reflects that it is concerned with interactions and relations of various levels of government, influenced largely by the macro political system, socio-economic and geo-political diversities and how these can be harnessed to promote cooperation and integration without compromising their autonomy. National government The national government of Zimbabwe is the central authority of the country and the first tier. It is made up of three arms: the executive authority, the legislature and the judiciary. This section shall explore the horizontal diffusion of authority and separation of power among the three arms of government as noted above and vertical influence of the three arms on the development and operations of sub national tiers of government The legislature Section 116 of the Constitution vests the legislative authority of Zimbabwe in the legislature which shall comprise of parliament plus the president of the nation. The structure and exercise of legislative authority and the delegation of legislative authority is provided in part 5 of the Constitution. In terms of this Constitution, the legislature of Zimbabwe consists of: (a) a Head of State and (b) a bicameral Chamber „Parliament‟ comprising  The 80 member Senate – an upper house which is made up of elected senators, members appointed on the basis of proportional representation, and traditional chiefs chosen by the council of chiefs. The context of inter-governsmental relations in Zimbabwe. Reflections from the Constitution... DOI: 10.9790/0837-20113741 www.iosrjournals.org 38 | Page  The 270 member National Assembly – a lower house consisting of 210 members who are elected by voters registered on the common roll for 210 common roll constituencies and 60 women chosen on proportional representation from each of the 10 provinces. Meetings of the national assembly are chaired by the speaker of the national assembly and those of senate by the president of senate, both elected in the first meeting after general elections of the respective bodies provided members present constitute a quorum. The major role of parliament (senate and national assembly) are: protecting the constitution and promoting democratic governance in Zimbabwe, ensuring that the state and all government institutions and agencies at every level act constitutionally and in the national interest and ensuring the accountability of all institutions and agencies of the state and government at every level. In order to perform the above functions effectively, parliament establish such a number of portfolio committees to oversee the various state, and government agencies and departments in the exercise of their mandates. These committees are designated according to government portfolios to examine the expenditure, administration and policy of government departments and other matters falling under their jurisdictions. In terms of section 134 of the Constitution, parliament may, in any Act of parliament, delegate legislative power to subordinate institutions to pass subordinate or subsidiary legislation but subject to review by parliament itself. This is both inevitable and desirable, as, in the modern state, parliament intervenes and regulates a lot of different activities and therefore cannot realistically be expected to pass all rules and regulations necessary to run the state. Thus, parliament passes legislation that simply establishes broad policies and then delegates to subordinate authorities the power to pass subsidiary legislation in order to bring into effect in detailed form those broad policies. The delegates are, for instance urban councils, who, acting in terms of the above section of the Constitution and section 228 of the Urban Councils Act [Chapter 29.15] may pass by-laws to regulate local development. However, although it is undisputable that delegated legislation is inevitable, concern is centred on the possibilities of abuse of delegated legislative powers and hence parliament should instutionalise sufficient systems to safeguard delegated legislative authority against abuse to the detriment of citizens. The executive authority The composition and exercise of executive authority is provided in chapters, 2, 3 and 4, sections 88 to 113 of the Constitution. The Constitution vests executive authority in the president, who subject to the Constitution shall exercise such executive authority through the cabinet directly appointed by him or her. Section 104 (1) provides that the president appoints ministers and assigns functions to them such as the administration of any Act of parliament, ministry, or department. The cabinet consist of the president, as the head (chair), vice presidents and such number of ministers appointed by the president. The president preside over cabinet meetings and in his absence the vice president takes over and in the absence of both, ministers present shall elect one from amongst their numbers to be chairperson to preside over the meeting. The Judiciary and the Courts Chapter 8, sections 162 to 191 of the Constitution vests judiciary authority in the Supreme Court, the High Court, and subsidiary courts. The President appoints the Chief Justice, who is the head of the judiciary and Supreme and High court judges after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission. Section 164 emphasises the independence and impartiality of the courts as the cornerstone of any credible justice delivery system. The independence and impartiality of the judiciary is deemed central to the rule of law and democratic governance by the Constitution and therefore neither, the state nor any institution or agency of the government at any level may interfere with the functions of the courts. The context of inter-governsmental relations in Zimbabwe. Reflections from the Constitution... DOI: 10.9790/0837-20113741 www.iosrjournals.org 39 | Page The Zimbabwean hierarchy of authorities Source; Marume (2013) Provincial governments The second tier of government consists of provincial and metropolitan government and administration system. This section shall explore the development and existence of provinces, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the operation of the provincial authorities through a cross-examination of their historiography. These provincial authorities are the second level of authority in terms of the Constitution. The provinces and provincial authorities, developed in Zimbabwe over the years, for example, by 1890, Zimbabwe (then Southern Rhodesia) was made up of two roughly equal provinces; namely, Matabeleland and Mashonaland. Between 1972 and 1985 Zimbabwe had been divided into eight provinces as follows: Mashonaland East; Mashonaland West; Mashonaland Central; Masvingo; Midlands; Matabeleland North; Matabeleland South and Manicaland (Marume 2013). It should be pointed out that in each of the 8 former provinces there had been a provincial authority with jurisdiction over African tribal trust and purchase lands and only over African local councils between 1972 and 1985. They did not have jurisdiction over the European areas and urban local authorities. In 1985, government passed the Provincial Councils and Administration Act, Chapter 29.11 establishing Provincial Councils chaired by the Provincial Governor and Resident Minister appointed by the president. Other members were: all mayors and chairpersons of councils in the province, one councillor for each local authority (council) in the province, one traditional chief representing the interests of the provincial assembly of chiefs and three othe

</div>