# Politics and Culture in the Developing World: The Impact of Globalization

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Richard J. Payne, Jamal R. Nassar |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2002 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | بازتعریف سیاست خارجی منطقه‌ای |
| **مطالعه موردی** | ایران |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 24 |

## چکیده

List of Boxes. List of Tables. Preface. Part 1. Living in a Global Community 1. Government, Politics, and Cultures in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America. Introduction What Is a Globalization? What Is Politics? What Is Government? Forms of Government. What Is Culture? What Is a State? What Is a Nation? Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East. Africa. Asia. Latin America. The Middle East. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 2. Religion and Politics. Introduction. Islam. The Teachings of Islam. Islam and Politics. Iran. Hinduism. Hinduism and Indian Politics. Buddhism. Buddhism and Politics. Sri Lanka. Christianity in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Haiti. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. ddresses and Websites. Endnotes. 3. Nationalism, Colonialism, and Independence. Introduction. What Is Nationalism? Consequences of Nationalism. Colonialism. The Struggle for National Liberation. India. Algeria. Ghana. Brazil. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 4. Global and Domestic Inequalities. Introduction. Growing Inequality Between North and South. Enduring Poverty in the South. Economic Inequalities Within Rich Countries. Regional Inequalities. The Gulf. Between Rich and Poor in the South. The Causes of Inequality Between North and South. Narrowing the Gaps. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 5. Global Interdependence. Introduction. The Global Reality. Global Interdependence and Your Life. Economic Interdependence. Environmental Interdependence. Cultural Interdependence. Globalization. Terrorism and Globalization. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. Part 2. Challenges of Development in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America 6. Challenges of Development. Introduction. What Is Development? The Role of Government in Development. The Classical Economic Model and Free-Market Capitalism. State Capitalism. Theories of Development. Modernization Theory and Developmentalism. Marxist Theory (Dependency Theory). Third World and African Socialism (Community and Grassroots Development. Feminist Theory). Sustainable Development. Factors Facilitating and Impeding Development. Values of the Leaders and Citizens. Natural Resources and Natural Disasters. The International and Regional Economic Environment. Population. Education and Healthcare. Political Instability. Corruption and Economic Development. Debt, Foreign Aid, and Development. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 7. The Costs of Development. Introduction. Social and Cultural Costs of Development. Child Labor. Sweatshops. Economic and Political Costs of Development. Consumerism and Development. Urbanization and Development. The Decline of Agriculture and Economic Development. Environmental Costs of Development. Deforestation. Dam Construction. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 8. Women in the Developing World. Introduction. The Roles of Women. The Status of Women. Women in Education. Women in Development. Women in Agriculture. Women's Political Participation. Women in Turkey: A Case Study. Women as Leaders in the Developing World. Empowering Women. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 9. Transitions to Democracy and Human Rights. Introduction. Democracy. Political Participation and Democratic Freedoms. Factors Conducive to Democracy. Transitions to Democracy. Democratic Transitions in Latin America. Democratic Transitions in Africa. Democratic Transitions in Asia. What Happens to Ex-Dictators? Human Rights in the Developing World. Women and Human Rights. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. Part 3. Leadership and Public Policy. 10. Political Leadership. Introduction. Patriarchal Leadership. Military Leadership. Revolutionary Military Leaders: Nasser of Egypt. Transitional Military Leaders: The Case of Nigeria. Conservative Military Leaders: The Case of Chile. Nonmilitary Leadership. The Monarch as Leader: Saudi Arabia. Communist Leaders: The Case of Cuba's Castro. Leaders in Democracies: The Case of India. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 11. Bureaucracy. Introduction. Implementation. Regulation. The Bureaucracy in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Structural Uniformity. Cultural Variations. Shortage of Skilled Staff. Corruption. Formalism. Operational Autonomy. Bureaucracy in the Peoples Republic of China. Bureaucracy in Mexico. Bureaucracy in South Africa. The Bureaucracy in Egypt. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. Part 4. Ethnic Conflicts, Migration, and International Relations. 12. Ethnicity, Ethnic Conflict, and Conflict Resolution. Introduction. Ethnicity and Ethnic Identity. The Causes of Ethnic Conflict. The Costs of Ethnic Conflict. Ethnic Conflicts in Africa. Nigeria. Angola. Liberia. The Sudan. Rwanda. Ethnic Conflicts in Asia. India. China. Sri Lanka. Indonesia and East Timor. East Timor. The Kurds. Ethnic Conflicts in Latin America. Resolving Ethnic Conflicts. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 13. Migration. Introduction. What Is Migration? Causes of Migration. Push Factors. Palestinian Refugees. Pull Factors. Case Studies. The Impact of Migration on Poor Countries. The Impact of Migration on Rich Countries. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. 14. Foreign Relations of the Developing Countries. Introduction. Making Foreign Policy in Developing Countries. The Developing World and the United States. Afghanistan: A Case Study. Economic Globalization and Foreign Policies. Conflict and Cooperation among Developing Countries. Regional Economic and Political Integration. Foreign Relations of Developing Countries. China. India. Egypt. Mexico. Cuba. Summary and Review. Key Terms. Discussion Questions. Suggested Readings. Addresses and Websites. Endnotes. Glossary. Bibliography. Index.

## منابع مرتبط

- **تناقض دارد با** [The Soviet Union in Afghanistan: Benefits and Costs](1763-the-soviet-union-in-afghanistan-benefits-and-costs.fa.md)
- **گسترش می‌دهد** [U.S. Interests in Central Asia and the Challenges to Them](1774-us-interests-in-central-asia-and-the-challenges-to-them.fa.md)
- **تناقض دارد با** [Positive Peace in the Islamic Perspective of International Relations: The Case of Iran’s Foreign Policy](3918-positive-peace-in-the-islamic-perspective-of-international-relations-the-case-of.fa.md)
- **گسترش می‌دهد** [The foreign policy of Iran in the Middle East and the American strategy of “system containment”](3944-the-foreign-policy-of-iran-in-the-middle-east-and-the-american-strategy-of-syste.fa.md)
- **تأیید می‌کند** [IRAN’S FOREIGN POLICY AND EVOLVING ROLE OF SOUTH-SOUTH COOPERATION](3935-irans-foreign-policy-and-evolving-role-of-south-south-cooperation.fa.md)
- **گسترش می‌دهد** [Energy Transition in the Middle East and North Africa Region: Regional Solutions for Climate Change Challenges Amid Economic Sanctions](3943-energy-transition-in-the-middle-east-and-north-africa-region-regional-solutions-.fa.md)
- **گسترش می‌دهد** [Saudi Arabia’s Foreign Policy under MBS: decision unit change and its impacts towards Yemen and Syria](3927-saudi-arabias-foreign-policy-under-mbs-decision-unit-change-and-its-impacts-towa.fa.md)
- **تأیید می‌کند** [Middle Power Ambitions: Iran’s Niche Diplomacy in a Post-Unipolar Era](3940-middle-power-ambitions-irans-niche-diplomacy-in-a-post-unipolar-era.fa.md)
- **گسترش می‌دهد** [The Post-Arab Spring Geopolitical Instability And Its Effects On Middle East And North Africa](2194-the-post-arab-spring-geopolitical-instability-and-its-effects-on-middle-east-and.fa.md)
- **تناقض دارد با** [Turkey and Iran after the Arab Spring: Finding a Middle Ground](1727-turkey-and-iran-after-the-arab-spring-finding-a-middle-ground.fa.md)
- **تناقض دارد با** [The “Proxy Wars” Strategy in Iranian Regional Foreign Policy](3915-the-proxy-wars-strategy-in-iranian-regional-foreign-policy.fa.md)
- **تأیید می‌کند** [Bridging the Scholarly Divide: Iran's Strategic Pivot to Asia and the Foreign Policy Imperative of Asian Studies in Academia](3913-bridging-the-scholarly-divide-irans-strategic-pivot-to-asia-and-the-foreign-poli.fa.md)
- **تأیید می‌کند** [TRANSFORMATION OF IRAN'S FOREIGN POLICY COURSE IN THE CONTEXT OF THE RUSSIAN-UKRAINIAN WAR, 2022–2025](3914-transformation-of-irans-foreign-policy-course-in-the-context-of-the-russian-ukra.fa.md)
- **تأیید می‌کند** [The International Politics of the Persian Gulf: A Cultural Genealogy](3949-the-international-politics-of-the-persian-gulf-a-cultural-genealogy.fa.md)

</div>