# The European Human Rights Convention:A New Court of Human Rights in Strasbourgas of November 1, 1998

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Andrew Drzemczewski |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 1998 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Judicial independence and rule of law |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Poland |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 31 |

## چکیده

I. Introduction Protocol No. 11 to European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), ratified by all Council of Europe member states - in other words, ratified by all of forty contracting states parties to ECHR (Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine and United Kingdom)-establishes a full-time, single court to replace Convention's prior monitoring machinery. It entered into force on November 1,1998.1 This text, opened for signature on May 1 1994, is one of concrete results of decisions taken by Council of Europe's Heads of State and Government at their first summit meeting in Vienna on October 8-9, 1993. II. Main Aspects of Reform A. The prior part-time monitoring institutions, namely European Commission of Human Rights and European Court of Human Rights, ceased to exist. A new European Court of Human Rights, operating full-time, was set up in Strasbourg, France. B. The system has been streamlined and, above all, all applicants now have direct access to new court. Any cases that are clearly unfounded will be sifted out of system at an early stage by a unanimous decision of court sitting as a three-judge committee (the cases will therefore be declared inadmissible). In large majority of cases, court will sit as a seven-judge chamber. Only in exceptional cases will court, sitting as a Grand Chamber of seventeen judges, decide on most important issues. The President of court and presidents of chambers will always be able to sit in Grand Chamber so as to ensure consistency and uniformity of main caselaw. A judge elected in respect of state party involved in a case will also sit in Grand Chamber in order to ensure a proper understanding of legal system under consideration. C. All allegations of violations of individuals' rights will be referred to court. The Committee of Ministers (the Council of Europe's executive organ) will no longer have jurisdiction to decide on merits of these cases. It will, however, retain its important role of monitoring enforcement of court's judgments. D. The right of individual application will be mandatory, and court will have jurisdiction with respect to all inter-state cases. III Operation of New Procedure as of November 1, 1998 As under past system, individual applications and inter-state applications will exist side by side. As secretariat of Commission did in past, registry of court will establish all necessary contacts with applicants and, if necessary, request further information. Then, a chamber of court will register application, and application will be assigned to a judge-rapporteur. The judge-rapporteur may refer application to a three-judge committee, which may include judgerapporteur. The committee may, by a unanimous decision, declare application inadmissible; this decision will then be final. When judge-rapporteur considers that application raises a question of principle and is not inadmissible or when committee is not unanimous in rejecting complaint, a chamber will examine application. (This procedure matches prior system that was in force before Commission.) A chamber, composed of seven judges, will decide on merits of an application and, if necessary, its competence to adjudicate case. The judge-rapporteur will prepare casefile and establish contact with parties. The parties will then submit their observations in writing. …

</div>