# Fiscal Integration in an Experimental Union: How Path‐Breaking Was the EU's Response to the COVID‐19 Pandemic?

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Waltraud Schelkle |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2021 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | آزادی رسانه و نهادسازی مطبوعاتی |
| **مطالعه موردی** | لهستان |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 2.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 114 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1111/jcms.13246](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcms.13246) |

## چکیده

The Covid-19 pandemic could not have started worse for the EU (Herszenhorn and Wheaton, 2020). In late February 2020, Italy requested supplies of medical equipment from other member states under the EU's crisis response programme, the Civil Protection Mechanism. The Commission duly escalated it to highest alert. But there was no response. Alarmed by Italy's request, France engaged in a stock-taking exercise that did not allow trading. Czechia, Germany, and Poland introduced export controls for medical equipment. Embarrassingly, China, Cuba and Russia came to the rescue more readily than fellow-Europeans (Poggioli, 2020). Under pressure from the Commission, German controls were lifted soon after (Reuters, 2020), but support for EU membership in Italy plummeted. The prospects for collective, forward-looking crisis management were bleak. Considerable policy resources had been spent since 2008 and their replenishment did not look promising. Some interventions, especially of the Troika, had done lasting political damage. A deepening political crisis seemed imminent, dividing an already divided union even further. Yet, over several months, the EU managed to agree on a massive support package for the anticipated long slow recovery. The breakthrough came in mid-July. This was not a Hamiltonian Moment, founding the fiscal union that some see as the panacea for all Euro Area (EA) woes (Kaletsky, 2020). But the flagship Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) recognizes that a preventive fiscal capacity is required to shield and support the EA's most vulnerable members. This is in stark contrast to the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), which handed out cheap rescue loans only once a government was shut out of bond markets, and imposed intrusive prescriptions for fiscal policy and institutional reforms, overseen by the Troika. The RRF adopts the principle that the promise of mutual support can prevent a panic before it spreads. This subsequently changed the political economy of Covid-19, although the public relations debacle of the Commission's vaccine procurement and the slow roll-out of the immunization programme in member states continued to test political unity. This article analyses what made the dynamic of the Covid-19 pandemic so different in political-economic terms. I look at this dynamic through the lens of three significant reforms, which were accompanied by a new crisis politics in which heads of state directly addressed sceptical audiences in other countries as well as their own. I provide evidence that the legacy of failure in the EA crisis spurred attempts by major protagonists to break with a path that they saw as politically disastrous for the EU polity as a whole. This should surprise any long-term observer of EU affairs. Ever since its revival in the late 1980s, the EU has enshrined long-term commitments of its members to openness and stability (Majone, 1996). The union operates in a rule-bound, path-dependent way that militates against such turnarounds. This scholarship is still valid and can actually explain why fiscal integration remains difficult even though a majority of member states has already given up their national currency. I propose a historical-institutionalist argument in the tradition of Pierson (2004) that can explain potentially path-breaking (or switching) reforms in the evolution of the experimental EU polity. The argument draws on literature on the possibility, and nature, of change in path-dependent institutional development (Streeck and Thelen, 2005; Capoccia and Kelemen, 2007). The reforms of 2020 can be seen as a critical juncture in a longer process, in which the EU transcends the confines of a regulatory polity but does not commit to fiscal federalism either (Genschel and Jachtenfuchs, 2014; Kriesi et al., 2021, pp. 4–6). The next section reviews how intergovernmental contestation over the legacy of the EA crisis led to a surprising political response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The subsequent section explains the innovations in the recovery packages agreed at the EU level. The last section outlines how we can understand path-breaking in the EU polity theoretically. After the inauspicious start, political actors tried to shape the public conversation about the pandemic. This conversation revolved, first, around crisis interpretation: is the crisis a shock from outside the EU or is past mismanagement to blame; does it affect all or primarily vulnerable Southern Europe members? The other debate concerned the appropriate economic response by the EU: how much additional support from the EU is needed to rekindle growth in member states? For answers, I look primarily at the public statements of five heads of state, using discourse as evidence for a political strategy of change (Schmidt, 2000). It was one of the notable features of pandemic politics that political leaders spoke directly to audiences across borders where they expected opposition. The selection of these five leaders reflects the focus of media reports on the EU's pandemic management. There are, first of all, the Prime Ministers of Italy, Guiseppe Conte, and of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, who started the conversation by calling for bold action to a pandemic that hit them first and hard. Mark Rutte, the Dutch Prime Minister, was their main opponent, representing at least three more member states (Austria, Denmark, Sweden). French President Emmanuel Macron (France) joined Italy and Spain in an initiative of nine countries calling for Eurobonds in late March and adopted the role of an interlocutor. The German Chancellor Angela Merkel kept a low profile until mid-May when she and Macron proposed a surprisingly big transfer scheme, providing an anchor for the grand bargain under the German Council Presidency in July. An early influential diagnosis can be gleaned from a transnational statement by Prime Minister Sánchez, after the first extraordinary European Council on 10 March, 2020. More clearly than the Council conclusions, Sánchez stressed the dual nature of the crisis: a global emergency with a health and an economic dimension (Sánchez, 2020). This proved to be consequential as it divided the pandemic into a fast-burning public health crisis and a slow-burning recovery crisis (Seabrooke and Tsingou, 2019). While member states and the Commission started to coordinate their public health responses from mid-March onwards, governments could afford some time to consider measures addressing the economic fallout (Truchlewski et al., 2021). Conte (2020a) seconded Sánchez a week later in an interview with the FT, stressing that this was a global, not a Southern European, emergency. An open letter to Council President Michel signed by nine member states 1 was based on this distinction but had a normative thrust: ‘we are all facing a symmetric external shock, for which no country bears responsibility, but whose negative consequences are endured by all’ (Wilmès et al., 2020). This letter, published on 25 March, would become notorious for its demand for a joint debt instrument (‘Coronabonds’). The signatories included Greece and Ireland, Luxembourg and Slovenia, which had in fact very different experiences of the pandemic. Hence, this letter was a call for solidarity, directed against the narrative of the EA crisis in which those countries that needed a bailout were blamed for past failings that justified onerous corrections. The interpretation ‘symmetric shock, external cause, affecting all’ was specifically directed against the Dutch government. In late March, Finance Minister Hoekstra scandalized Southern Europeans when he reportedly asked for an investigation into why Spain was fiscally not prepared for the pandemic (Euractiv, 2020). The Portuguese Prime Minister called his remarks ‘repugnant’. A dozen mayors of Italian cities posted a one-page letter as an advertisement in a conservative German newspaper on 31 March, which was widely circulated in Dutch social media. In this letter to ‘dear German friends’, the Dutch position is denounced as a prime ‘example of a lack of ethical standards and solidarity’. The Dutch government was accused of raiding other countries' tax bases to the detriment of the poorest (Calenda, 2020, my translation). Simultaneously, Conte gave extensive interviews in the Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf and the German weekly Die Zeit, stressing that the pandemic resembles a natural catastrophe and ‘Dutch citizens may need guarantees, too’ (Conte, 2020b; Google translation). Hoekstra was shamed into an apology. The symmetric character of the pandemic could be framed, however, as a reason for why nobody should make extraordinary demands on others. Three weeks before the July summit, Mark Rutte stated in an interview with an Italian weekly: ‘We owe solidarity to the countries most affected by the pandemic, knowing, however, that we too have been seriously affected. This means that states that need and deserve help must also ensure that in the future they are capable of dealing with such crises on their own in a resilient way.’ (Valentino, 2020, Google translation) This understanding of resilience made it into the name of the recovery fund and it stands for reform in return for grants. In her first public statement to prepare Germany's rotating Council Presidency, Merkel (2020) adopted a multi-faceted diagnosis. It distilled the agreeable essence out of the dissenting positions. The interview, simultaneously published on 20 June in six European newspapers, 2 started with what the Dutch-led coalition stressed: ‘time and again it has been shown that Europe is not yet sufficiently resistant to crises’. But she also highlighted the point Southern European leaders had made: ‘the coronavirus pandemic is confronting us with a challenge of unprecedented dimensions. It has struck us all indiscriminately’. And she expressed the shared fear of a populist backlash: ‘Very high unemployment in a country can become politically explosive and thereby increase the threat to democracy. For Europe to survive, its economy needs to survive.’ Merkel's speeches in 2020 expressed repeatedly the quintessential liberal concern that representative democracy depends on economic stability. Merkel did not hide Germany's interest in the integrity of the Single Market. The Coronabonds letter had stated this appeal to enlightened self-interest early on: ‘Preserving the functioning of the Single Market is essential to give all European citizens the best possible care and the strongest guarantee that there will be no shortage of any kind.’ (Wilmès et al., 2020) Border closures, the disruption of supply chains, and the uneven ability to benefit from the easing of state aid rules were in nobody's interest. The threat to mutually beneficial economic interdependence became the compromise diagnosis, to which all sides could sign up. The debate on what response should follow from the diagnosis was dominated by the question of what role the ESM should play. Governments changed their positions as lternativesto the ESM appeared. Coronabonds were countered with limited grant proposals. It took the ‘innovative’ financial design of the recovery fund to set a path to agreement. Monetary policy alone cannot solve all problems; we need to do the same on the fiscal front and [..] time is of the essence The to follow is to open ESM to all member states to help them the consequences of the Covid-19 under the of by member state on the way resources are But the coalition of that Conte since was the and the were to to ESM loans since the ESM for any as on by in and 2020). early after the Coronabonds letter had been Conte that ESM were not up to the The that had made Conte this were by Finance Minister in an interview with German although he the of the be any as there were in the will into the country to the government how to do This is about support in the 2020) This last that in the EA the ESM had primarily as a for the the is in The Dutch Prime Minister, by made it that his first would be for the members to hit countries the of from the the ESM had to be at all, only with the of reforms 2020). than solidarity was the of he had that were a to loans before this was time came at a on A in a 2020). The Italian and the Dutch had the asked for that the would as a for the economic and ESM loans would have no Hoekstra with to a in the Dutch and his coalition government. And on the its on the response to the pandemic. It of the ESM which was signed by all about a later was not was this (2020) reports where had has to we are to a one A in the early last the of financial too much for the Dutch and too for In it was for The package was that financial were to The was on for these before the liberal and had proposed such an a the European a with the of the on the European Commission to propose a massive recovery and package what the European Stability the European and the European are already that is of the new financial [..] the would be by an [..] and recovery by the EU this package should not the of debt and should be to future A the Commission President gave a in which she the European will be the of will the of the European to the of we need to the Single Market after 2020). on the liberal the of Spain, proposed a fund on It would provide by on which the EU would have to interest It too Yet, a later on the recovery fund of to the European This was five before the the principle of bond by the EU for it proposed a transfer of to be in the long through the Commission's the Commission has no this must a of tax although this cannot be as it would a the Commission to this in It was and a of with the RRF of which are the before the Commission the coalition a for an Recovery the ESM of and But they the principle of the Commission to the 2020). This an the recovery fund and that could be to their The was not and not but posted on the Dutch It a that the countries would have to be for to the came in the of that their to the EU The in early had started the on the grand bargain of the EU and a recovery The was the political of an Merkel as much at a with Italian Prime Minister Conte in is [..] that recovery is [..] It has to be a to that Europe to be there is a political dimension the and 2020, my translation) In with Merkel's for a the fund would to all EU members. This also her of Eurobonds that would have only to members. In contrast to the other reforms, the to in an was a and March, member states massive support that their fiscal responses the financial crisis in 2020). these fiscal country after country in the that would not last for very Governments in countries around as as the financial crisis 2020). A for national unemployment has been in EU for a et al., 2020). A based on loans was to agree since it is unemployment and are not in national Hence, the Commission was to propose very on and it into on 2020. It had a of of which were by Commission, 2021). It seemed at the time although so after a of the pandemic over the path-breaking or path-dependent were these reforms in institutional political EU do with an to But political and can the the innovations will in to depends on institutional In of into the ESM was first and on the But under the programme, the country has to sign a of policy at addressing the 2020). The support on demand of a state of which is to loans of its all, no is imposed which to be in a which is for all ESM members. The was to the to ESM The reform as such is not it an of the But it stands for an of fiscal and policy in that it a by the and to The can government from only after a time so as not to the of public debt under This means financial a new bond the cannot directly in the has already up all such a government could only a it can from the of by on the and of an that other ESM with the EU's programme for national is a to the of to of in 2020. It member states to such and for unemployment as in of through to this time for and new could be for to support the who are not to unemployment under an for national on There is no the member state providing evidence of of The Commission must to the Council six on how loans have been The programme is out of the EU but by from member given that it the for demand on resources 2020). is in that it has no in other EU a stark contrast to EU in the crisis since 2008 where the of reforms was to The EU's is Commission, that can be as not directly against the same the that is a programme for an extraordinary became a for and unemployment in the it would a national than fiscal that the grant of the RRF has with a are such that they help member states more but also those hit by the pandemic, the with The grant also required the Commission for the first time the to The Council the Commission on of the in The long-term are by the the of the Eurobonds The RRF is to the European for the first time providing financial for with this of economic The European also that the European has a the on the of as a for that are to this is the is can be to an have not been This is a the RRF should make it to the fiscal Recovery and resilience must set out a package of reforms and public to be by over of the requested must be spent on change and The Commission in up these to a and the Council them on a the the in the Council to pressure on The RRF is a support that fiscal to the EU that it did not have The Commission was to the EU in to Coronabonds and more for national 2020). on a is and an of fiscal member states have an to give the Commission the to a which is to be through a tax and which are that to are big and yet they are The RRF is a and it to the EU as a the to the is as long as not all EU members the The to tax and are for of the pandemic. design and more countries have to to the of by members. The three reforms fiscal integration for an experimental polity. The EU polity when catastrophe or national pp. The RRF and to The ESM for and The political of these reforms in the fact that they allow EU governments to on the for longer as a providing the politically and a way to fiscal integration to a fiscal was the only for a union of The change we have seen in the EU's crisis is of The and the of the ESM reform and massive recovery can be as a to change the path of bailout This path had been with a of since fiscal a legacy of failure as public statements by Conte, Macron and Sánchez made can explain why and attempts at change is the expected of institutional evolution (Streeck and Thelen, But actors may also to crises as critical in which the future is open and can have a on the of and Kelemen, pp. The experimental polity of the EU to such of national and to make that can change the of what in through and policy In this are to up by a massive policy and them as critical in which change can and Kelemen, a major of this has repeatedly shown this The of the Coronabonds letter is evidence for such political After all, an institutional reform that would was an response to an emergency. The pandemic was also not to members. But the letter the especially of Italy's and of a of crisis management and to ESM as the The of a for of by the government that would not do to the promise of financial when Coronabonds were the The by Italy's Prime Minister to ESM those on the of the that they required Italy's they the path was a possibility, which is with the of a critical juncture The all the Dutch to the conservative that a But they were on the not only the policy all, engaged in and interview that for the of their European A week after the letter and a after the Italian letter, the German had on its an open letter to Italian It them that are with with the German economic would not have been 2020, my translation) also a into This from a not for a of the A that against the was Germany's in the rotating Council Presidency, under a Chancellor who must have been concerned about her et in how Merkel her the early of the pandemic to in an exercise of she made the to audiences that this was a crisis that Germany's solidarity with other EU not only for its own economic but also a Europe remains the of the German in the these reforms do not to a to fiscal they still a critical juncture in 2020. would have shown an of in the EU as a as a from the path-dependent development of the EA I have that the ESM and even the RRF reform have and can to the But political of can also that are the of this that the crisis narrative had to be changed and that the contestation over the appropriate response had to be forward-looking and This understanding of a historical-institutionalist that are they are readily and have already to to and do lasting political damage. It was the of the EU this time that when Southern European countries were again to their by a their governments to the of the past the

</div>