# Official Apologies and the Quest for Historical Justice

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Michaël R. Marrus |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2007 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Transitional justice |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Poland |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | 3.0 |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 108 |
| **شناسه دیجیتال** | [10.1080/14754830601098402](https://doi.org/10.1080/14754830601098402) |

## چکیده

Abstract This article examines apologies that are offered on behalf of public bodies—nations, governments, or institutions—in response to historic wrongs. The context is the insufficiency of justice seeking in the world, and the unhealthy, sometimes long-moldering residue left behind by generations that have ignored great wrongs or failed to address them properly. Because of this insufficiency, the passage of time, and the inaccessibility of more conventional means for righting these wrongs, societies may need to find unconventional solutions in a continuing quest for justice. For historic wrongs, I argue in this essay, apologies are worth considering. Michael Marrus is the Chancellor Rose and Ray Wolfe Professor Emeritus of Holocaust Studies at the University of Toronto. A Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and the Royal Historical Society, he received his M.A. and Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley. He is the author, among other books, of The Politics of Assimilation: French Jews at the Time of the Dreyfus Affair, Vichy France and the Jews (with Robert Paxton), The Unwanted: European Refugees in the Twentieth Century, The Holocaust in History, Mr. Sam: The Life and Times of Samuel Bronfman, and The Nuremberg War Crimes Trial, 1945–46. He was a member of the International Catholic–Jewish Historical Commission to examine the role of the Vatican during the Holocaust. Among the many who have assisted me in the preparation of this article, I would like particularly to thank Elazar Barkan, Richard Bilder, David Dyzenhaus, Roger Errera, Rhoda Howard-Hassmann, Alison Dundes Renteln, Mario Sznajder, and John Torpey. I am grateful as well to the Ford Foundation which supported a series of seminars on the subject of apologies I organized at the Munk Centre for International Studies of the University of Toronto during the academic year 2004–2005. Notes 1. Abbott Gleason, In response to "discredited beliefs," [Online]. Avalilable: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/kritika/v004/4.2gleason.html [31 May 2005]; Aaron Lazare (2004) On Apology (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 255–256. In a classic American film on the Indian Wars, She Wore a Yellow Ribbon (1949), John Wayne says, through his character, the crusty cavalry commander Captain Nathan Brittles: "Never apologize, mister, it's a sign of weakness." Calvin Weisberger (2003) Why do you do, what you do, when you do, what you do, Permanente Journal, 7 (Fall). [Online]. Available: http://xnet.kp.org/permanentejournal/fall03/why.html [17 June 2005]. One other example: The Canadian women's suffrage campaigner and activist, Nellie McClung perhaps best summed up the politician's bloody-mindedness on the matter: "Never retract, never explain, never apologize—get the thing done and let them howl." See Nellie McClung, Women's suffrage, and the person's case [Online]. Available: http://www.canadianstudies.ca/NewJapan/mcclungunit.html [26 March 2006]. 2. Marina Warner (n.d.) Sorry: The present state of apology, [Online]. Available: http://www.opendemocracy.org/debates/article-3-76-603.jsp [31 May 2005]. 3. Americans:2006 Americans apologise en masse for Bush victory. Mail & Guardian online, Thursday, November 11, 2004. [Online]. Available: http://sorryeverybody.com/, http://www.mg.co.za/Content/13.asp?cg=BreakingNews-Andinothernews&ao=125319 [10 November 2004]. When last checked (March 25, 2006), I noted a 256-page book collecting these apologies, Sorry Everybody: An Apology to the World for the Re-election of George W. Bush, selling for $12.71. 4. Jay Rayner (2004) The Apologist (London: Atlantic Books), pp. 237, 303, 354. See the satirical "Penitential News," on a Web site publicizing this book. [Online]. Available: http://www.the-apologist.co.uk/ [1 June 2005]. 5. Roy L. Brooks (ed.) (1999) When Sorry Isn't Enough: The Controversy over Apologies and Reparations for Human Injustice (New York: New York University Press); Janna Thompson (2002) Taking Responsibility for the Past: Reparation and Historical Justice (Cambridge: Polity Press); Elazar Barkan (2000) The Guilt of Nations: Restitution and Negotiating Historical Injustices (New York: Norton); Lee Taft (2000) Apology subverted: The commodification of apology. Yale Law Journal, 109, 1135. For a feminist analysis, see Aviva Orenstein (1999) Apology excepted: Incorporating a feminist analysis into evidence policy where you would least expect. Southwestern University Law Review, 28, 222–278; and, for an impressive and sophisticated "game theoretic signaling model," see Benjamin Ho (2005) A theory of apologies, unpublished paper [Online]. Available: http://icf.yale.edu/pdf/whiteboxconf05/Ho.pdf [25 March 2006]. 6. Mark Gibney and Niklaus Steiner (2004) Apology and the "war on terror," unpublished paper, presented at the conference "The Age of Apology: The West Faces its Own Past," University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, October 21–24, 2004. 7. Lazare (2004: 6). Google, however uncertain as an arbiter, nevertheless confirms the point. When submitted to inquiry on March 25, 2006, "apologies" yields over forty-five million results. ("Globalization," to take a well-worn term, produces about 102 million.) And even with refinements, apologies do well: "public apologies" produces 16.7 million results, and "official apologies" generates just over 8.1 million. 8. For reasons of time and space I have not been able to give full enough attention to cross-cultural themes in apologies—something omitted in most discussions of this topic. On this issue, see the classic article by Hiroshi Wagatsuma and Arthur Rosett (1986) The implications of apology: Law and culture in Japan and the United States. Law and Society Review, 20, 461–496. I have also learned much from Alison Dundes Renteln, "Apologies: A cross-cultural analysis," lecture delivered at the University of Toronto, February 1, 2005. See also Lazare (2004: 31–34); Elite Olshtain (1989) Apologies across languages, in Cross-Cultural Pragmatics: Requests and Apologies, Shoshana Blum-Kulka, Juliane House, and Gabriele Kasper (eds.) (Norwood, NJ: Ablex), pp. 155–173; Leita Hickson (1986) The social contexts of apology in dispute settlement: A cross-cultural study, Ethnology, 25, 283–294; and Hang Zhang (2001) Culture and apology: The Hainan Island incident, World Englishes, 20, 383–391. 9. Martha Minow (1998) Between Vengeance and Forgiveness (Boston: Beacon Press), p. 114, drawing on Nicholas Tavuchis (1991) Mea Culpa: A Sociology of Apology and Reconciliation (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press), p. 5. 10. On his last day as prime minister, Trudeau refused, apparently heatedly, a request that he apologize to Japanese Canadians for wartime removals and internments. "I cannot rewrite history," he said. "It is our purpose to be just in our time and that is what we have done in bringing in the Charter of Rights." Maryka Omatsu (1992) Bittersweet Passage: Redress and the Japanese Canadian Experience (Toronto: Between the Lines), p. 168. 11. See "Political apologies: Chronological list," [Online]. Available: http://reserve.mg2.org/apologies.htm [27 April 2005]; Trudy Govier and Wilhelm Verwoerd (2002) Taking wrongs seriously: A qualified defense of public apologies, Saskatchewan Law Review, 65, 140. 12. Jacob Weissberg (1998) Sorry excuse: Rules for national apologies, Slate, April 4 [Online]. Available: http://slate.misn.com/id/2309/ [24 April 2005]. 13. Elazar Barkan, "An age of apology?," lecture at the University of Toronto, March 17, 2005. 14. Luigi Accattoli (1997) Quando il Papa chiede perdono (Milan: Mondadori). 15. "Pope sends first e-mail apology," BBC News, November 23, 2001. [Online]. Available: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/Europe/1671540.stm [1 June 2005]. 16. Peter Goodspeed (2005) "Japan: Always having to say sorry. National Post, April 23. For a rich collection of broad relevance, see Andrew Horvat and Gebhard Hielscher (eds.) (2003) Sharing the Burden of the Past: Legacies of War in Europe, America and Asia (Tokyo: The Asia Foundation and Friedrich-Ebert-Siftung). 17. Assembly of First Nations chief signs historic political accord to resolve the legacy of residential schools, May 30, 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.afn.ca/article.asp?id=1185 [3June2005]. 18. Ken Killpatrick and Colin Freeze (2005) Red Cross pleads guilty, offers apology in blood scandal, Globe and Mail, May 31. 19. Tavuchis (1991:45 and passim). On the importance of the remedial see also Erving Goffman, (1971) Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order (New York: Basic Books) p. 113. 20. Quoted in Russell Daye (2004) Political Forgiveness: Lessons from South Africa (Maryknoll, New York: Orbis Books), pp. 60–61. 21. Daye (2004: 61). On the importance of context, see David A. Crocker (2003) Reckoning with past wrongs, in Dilemmas of Reconciliation: Cases and Concepts, Carol A. L. Prager and Trudy Govier (eds.) (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press), p. 57. 22. An example of the I'm-sorry-you-misunderstood-me failed apology, admittedly qualified by a partial admission of error by getting some facts wrong, is Newsweek's "Letter to Our Readers" of May 2005 about the alleged desecration of the Koran by American troops at Guantanamo Bay: "As most of you know, we have unequivocally retracted our story. In the light of the Pentagon's denials and our source's changing position on the allegation, the only responsible course was to say that we no longer stand by our story. We have also offered a sincere apology to our readers and especially to anyone affected by violence that may have been related to what we published. To the extent that our story played a role in contributing to such violence, we are deeply sorry. Let me assure both our readers and our staffers that NEWSWEEK remains every bit as committed to honest, independent and accurate reporting as we always have been. In this case, however, we got an important story wrong, and honor requires us to admit our mistake and redouble our efforts to make sure that nothing like this ever happens again. One of the frustrating aspects of our initial inquiry is that we seem to have taken so many appropriate steps in reporting the Guantanamo story. On the basis of what we know now, I've seen nothing to suggest that our people acted unethically or unprofessionally." MSNBC News. [Online]. Available: http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7937042/site/newsweek/ [10 June 2005]. 23. Omatsu (1992: 100). In a reflection on the American government's similar apology to Japanese Americans, Representative Doris Matsui commented on its great significance for their families. "My father-in-law had the letter of apology, from the President of the United States, framed and hanging in his home. It was that important to members of their generation." Sheryl Gay Stolberg (2005). The Senate apologizes, mostly. New York Times, June 19. For a comparison of the Canadian and American experiences see John Torpey (2006) Making Whole What Has Been Smashed: On Reparations Politics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press), Ch. 3 (with Rosa Sevy). 24. Thompson (2002: xi). 25. Elisabeth Brumiller and Eric Schmitt (2004) Bush apologizes for Iraq abuse: Backs Rumsfeld, New York Times, May 7. It is unclear whether Bush understood his remarks as an apology, however. Asked about the matter in response to some television interviews with Bush a few days before, White House Press Secretary Scott McClellan said, "The president is sorry for what occurred and the pain it has caused." When asked why Bush had not himself apologized, McClellan replied, "I'm saying it now for him." Terence Hunt (2004) Bush calls treatment of prisoners "abhorrent" in TV interviews Houston Chronicle, May 5. 26. Mark Rothschild, "No apology from Bush for abusive Troops," Anti war.Com [Online]. Available: http://www.antiwar.com/rothschild/?articleid=2489 (2 June 2005); Gibney and Steiner (2004). 27. Weissberg (1998). 28. Marina Warner (2002) Sorry, Open Democracy, November 7. [Online]. Available: http://www.opendemocracy.net/content/articles/pdf/603.pdf?redirect2=/debates/article-5-76-603.jsp [2 June 2005]. 29. For reasons having to do with the Soviet domination of Poland at the time, Warsaw's monument to the Ghetto Uprising of 1943 stood for much more, in Polish society, than the victimization of Jews. On the Kniefall see Willy Brandt (1994) Erinnerungen: "Mit den Notizen zum Fall G" (Berlin: Ullstein), p. 214; Jeffrey Herf (1997) Divided Memory: The Nazi Past in the Two Germanys (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press), p. 345. 30. "Willy Brandt's silent apology," Memory, History and Memorials, [online]. Available: http://www.facinghistorycampus.org/campus/memorials.nsf/0/DC396F572BD4D99F85256FA80055E9B1?OpenDocument [3 June 2006]. I know of no study of whether reminders of apologies can be excessive. Brandt's Kniefall could be a candidate. A looped film recording of his gesture plays continuously at the German Historical Museum in Berlin. John Borneman provides additional evidence: "In a book of 22 written testimonials to Brandt following his death, over half mention his Warsaw apology. … Many German secondary schools teach the apology as an integral event of self-definition. It frequently comes up on television talk shows, especially by members of the first postwar generation, the "68ers," who identify the apology as one of the few times they were actually proud of a German statesman, or by extension, were themselves proud to be German." John Borneman (1999) Can public apologies contribute to peace? An argument for retribution, unpublished paper [Online]. Available: http://condor.depaul.edu/∼rrotenbe/aeer/v17n1/borneman.pdf [30 May 2005]. 31. Tavuchis (1991:99). Sometimes interpersonal apologies can be presented as having "official" status—a seeming intention of South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, whose architects had great hopes that such apologies might prove contagious and promote a kind of grass roots movement of political forgiveness. As Russell Daye observes, "The hearings of the commission … were set up so that interpersonal interactions were given a special place as moments of import in the transformation of the nation. Hearings in which a perpetrator or two faced a cluster of victims were given the status of a parable in the text of the nation's reconstitution." Daye describes his own reaction to witnessing such dramas as moving "back and forth between a feeling that I was witnessing a sacred ritual and disgust over the voyeurism of it all" (Daye 2004:70–71). 32. Tavuchis (1991:109). Rather than using the term "official apologies," which I find most helpful, Tavuchis refers to "collective apologetic speech." Tavuchis also makes the useful point that sorrow or sincerity, which play such an important role in interpersonal apologies, are much less important in official versions (1991: 117). 33. Alex Boraine (2004) Transitional justice as an emerging field, March 11 [Online]. Available: http://web.idrc.ca/uploads/user-S/10829975041revised-boraine-ottawa-2004.pdf [5 June 2005]. See also Ruti Teitel (2000) Transitional Justice (New York: Oxford University Press), p. 84. For a critical review of recent literature, see David Dyzenhaus (2003) "Review essay: Transitional justice, International Journal of Constitutional Law, I, 163–175. 34. Luis Roniger and Mario Sznajder (1999) The Legacy of Human-Rights Violations in the Southern Cone: Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay (Oxford: Oxford University Press), p. 101. 35. Teitel (2000: 84). 36. Mark Osiel (1997) Mass Atrocity, Collective Memory, and the Law (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers) p. 277. 37. Thompson (2002:x); Barkan (2000). 38. Jon Elster (1990) Norms of revenge, Ethics, 100, 862–885. Often with historic wrongs fears that exposure to legal liability can impede the preferring of apologies even when there is a desire to do so. For a recent discussion of this problem and some strategies for dealing with it see Ombudsman of British Columbia (2006) The of apology: the legal to the Assembly of British (2003) The of Reparations for International Law Review, (2001) Political Forgiveness University Press), p. Notes for an address by the [Online]. Available: 2005]. from the Past: of by the of Indian and June The [Online]. Available: June 2005]. by the President in apology for study done in May [Online]. Available: [5 June 2005]. See The (New York: (2005) An apology for an of June [Online]. Available: June 2005]. For a full see also (2005) the on The Post, June 11. The Past: History, and German National (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press), p. A of on History & Memory, of a of culture at the of the of the In that the political to and perhaps even One have the of and to their is a of national be be be victims be In the of to we to our (2005) (Toronto: p. John Torpey Politics and the and Jeffrey and The Politics of in Politics and the Past: On Historical John Torpey & this is in as of and which calls of that and have across the in the past and more are This for is a sign of a with an a desire to the aspects of as a of of May [Online]. Available: June 2005]. Barkan (2000: John Torpey (2004) for the The movement for for Journal of Human (1990) The Age of (New York: Columbia University See also Govier and Verwoerd (2002: See (2004) in International Law, (Oxford: Oxford University (2002) Reparations in the on state American Journal of International Law, on Responsibility of for by the International Law Commission at its [Online]. Available: [5 June 2005]. Lazare 57. and John Torpey (2004) World Journal of Human 140. (2003) Reconciliation for In Dilemmas of Carol Prager and Trudy Govier (eds.) (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press), p. with (1999) [Online]. Available: June 2005]. [Online]. Available: June 2005]. of of the of the [Online]. Available: 11 June 2005]. International Commission (1999) and Reconciliation: The and the of the [Online]. Available: June 2005]. French in Holocaust BBC News, [Online]. Available: June 2005]. and Torpey (2004: (2002) Apology in the justice for apology as an additional in the legal Law, 20, "The of in discussion of in to Minow See also (2004) Justice Legacies of the Holocaust and World War (New York: Oxford University Press); W. (2002) The of the apology. Journal, When victims and the role of Law Journal, Michael Marrus (2002) History and the Holocaust in the In Lessons and Legacies The Holocaust and (ed.) University Press), pp. Osiel For an of a see (2001) The of Making Law and History in the of the Holocaust (New Yale University See also (2001) on War Crimes and the of Holocaust History and (Oxford: Oxford University Michael (2003) Holocaust The for Restitution in (New York: New York University Press), p. See also (2003) and the of World War (New York: Public and (2004) International Law and the and October United Holocaust Quoted in (2005) A of the New York Times, May 9. John Borneman (1997) Justice and in NJ: University Alison Dundes (2005) A cross-cultural delivered at the University of Toronto, February 1. Hunt (2004) Bush, offers no April 9. (1999) Crimes The for Justice New York: New Press), Tavuchis (2003) Political apologies and public In Public in and in the Century, and (eds.) University of Press), pp. See and (2002) justice, and Journal of the of and the Law, 30, On and for Tavuchis Minow and, 4. Mark Osiel of University of Law Review, Often with the political such has on who has been of and who official apologies for historic wrongs on in the United have this to apologize as a of of or even of a of In response to of for American in the for Representative a with what he in the for the of the United Sheryl Gay Stolberg (2005) The Senate apologizes, mostly. New York Times, June 19. For a see Wilhelm Verwoerd (2003) a response to of the South Truth and Reconciliation Commission, In Dilemmas of Prager and Trudy Govier (eds.) (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press), pp. For a recent discussion of particularly the of see (2002) The of and Forgiveness (New York: Oxford University (2002) we Why be unpublished paper, November [Online]. Available: [30 May 2005]. (n.d.) for History [Online]. Available: [27 April 2005]. Thompson (2002: Thompson with the of whether apologies on the of the British people for the recent to the The is that British have nothing to do with have a it is not that you be a of who or an having an who the make you the when you a 36. 84. (1992) Ethics, 5. president apology for 30, [Online]. Available: February 2005]. BBC News, 2004. [Online]. Available: May [Online]. Available: May 2005]. On the of apologies in the case, see Torpey (ed.) (1998) International of Legacies of (New York: George wrongs and and Public one particularly in the context of a the have an not only on the who in the in and some as a of the and at to the state of that would have for the with as (1992) and In and New Society, and Roy W. (eds.) Oxford University Press), p. Robert and (Oxford: pp. Robert (2001) The of apology and the of The Public 23, 32. Quoted in (1989) The and the (New York: Books), pp. On the importance of see David and (2002) The of Human in Human Law (1992: Trudy Govier (2003) What is and why is it In Dilemmas of A. L. Prager and Trudy Govier (eds.) (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press), p. Govier 84). Minow See also Forgiveness and 101. Thompson (2002: David A. Crocker (2003) Reckoning with past A In Dilemmas of A. L. Prager and Trudy Govier (eds.) (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press), p. Roy and L. (1999) The and two of forgiveness. In of Forgiveness: and L. (ed.) Foundation Press), pp. Thompson (2002: See (2001) France p. about the of To this at do like even … be a only there is some other a could that would be For justice, in the of and and could be be the of is what is in in most of the in which is the of and efforts at are to on the of other no such calls for need not be not be they might be (1998) See (1994) Apologies and in Lazare (2004: Trudy Govier and Wilhelm Verwoerd (2002) and the problem of national of the Richard The role of apology in paper, unpublished paper, presented at the conference "The Age of Apology: The West Faces its Own Past," University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, October 18. Tavuchis (1991: 113. Mark Gibney and (2001) The status of state Human 23, Robert (1998) of apology. November 25, 33. House of in (1999) for and legal for the Law Commission of 9. to Minow

</div>