# In search of good quality part-time employment

<div dir="rtl" markdown>

| نویسندگان | Colette Fagan, Helen Norman, Mark Smith, María del Carmen González Menéndez |
|---|---|
| **سال** | 2014 |
| **دسته‌بندی** | Women's rights codification and gender equality |
| **مطالعه موردی** | Indonesia |
| **امتیاز ارتباط** | در انتظار |
| **تعداد استنادها** | 77 |

## چکیده

In the International Labour Organization (ILO) Part-Time Work Convention, 1994 (No. 175), "parttime work" is defined as hours of work that are shorter than those for comparable full-time work (in the country, sector, and occupation).This report provides a synthesis of the international evidence on developments in part-time work and the situation of part-time workers.It addresses the major issues, which were identified in the conclusions of the ILO's Tripartite Meeting of Experts on Working-time Arrangements (TMEWTA) in October 2011 (ILO, 2011), and extends the discussion in a previous working-time report (Fagan et al., 2012) that was an input to the TMEWTA. This report: Assesses the current employment conditions of part-time workers in comparison with those of comparable full-time workers across a range of countries. Investigates the barriers to mutually agreed and freely chosen part-time work that meets the needs of both employers and workers. Identifies those government policies and enterprise policies and practices regarding working hours and working-time arrangements, which appear to be likely to improve both access to, and the quality of, part-time work arrangements, while also advancing gender equality. Reviews and analyses those government and enterprise policies, practices and overall conditions that may help workers to successfully transition between full-and part-time work. Chapter two identifies seven issues concerning the quality of part-time employment: There is a labour-market mismatch between the preferences for, and the availability of, parttime work, and it is important to differentiate between voluntary and involuntary part-time work. Many part-time jobs are of poorer quality than full-time jobs at most levels. The definition and incidence of part-time employment varies nationally, as does the available information. Part-time employment is undertaken largely by women with family responsibilities.This can reinforce gender inequalities unless wider measures are put in place to enhance its quality and to provide other working-time options and infrastructure to support these workers.The recent increase in male part-time employment is mainly among younger and older workers. Government policies have shaped the quality of part-time work that has emerged in different countries. In many developing countries, part-time employment is strongly associated with working in the informal economy, and so its quality is closely bound up with measures directed at improving working conditions and social protection in the informal economy, and more importantly, measures promoting formalization. Employers use part-time employment to retain certain categories of workers: by responding to their expressed working-time preferences; to secure optimal staffing and operational flexibility; or, to create a secondary, cheaper and more "precarious" pool of workers.Better quality part-time jobs are usually generated from a "retention" strategy.2 Mara del Carmen Gonzlez Menndez reviewed the literature published in Spanish in Spain and Latin America and in English by nationals.The literature search for sources in Spanish was carried out mainly through three databases, google scholar and library catalogues.The three main databases are: Redalyc.Red de Revistas Cientficas de America Latina y El Caribe, Espaa y Portugal.http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/;Dialnet.Spanish based database (Universidad de la Rioja) artculos cientficos hispanos en Internet.http://dialnet

</div>